The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Fiddlers, by Arthur Mee


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Fiddlers
       Drink in the Witness Box 


Author: Arthur Mee



Release Date: December 15, 2016  [eBook #53733]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FIDDLERS***


E-text prepared by MWS, ellinora, and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 53733-h.htm or 53733-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/53733/53733-h/53733-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/53733/53733-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/fiddlersdrinkinw00meea


Transcriber’s note:

      Italic text is represented by underscores surrounding the
      _italic text_.

      Bold text is represented by equal signs surrounding the
      =bold text=.

      Small capitals have been converted to ALL CAPITALS.





THE FIDDLERS

Drink in the Witness Box

by

ARTHUR MEE


    _If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death, and
       those that are ready to be slain;
    If thou sayest, “Behold, we knew it not;” doth not he that
       pondereth the heart consider it?
    And shall not He render to every man according to his works?_







Published by Morgan & Scott, Ltd
12 Paternoster Buildings, London, E. C. 4

First Hundred Thousand       May 15, 1917
Second Hundred Thousand      June 1, 1917

Reprinted in the United States by
The American Issue Publishing Company
Westerville, Ohio

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration:

                        DRINK LEADING FAMINE IN

  The Drink Trade gave Germany her greatest weapon in the war by helping
  to make the bread famine.

  It was the wilful destruction of 4,800,000 tons of food, depriving the
  nation of her reserves, that led to the appalling gravity of the
  submarine menace.]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration:

                Drink, What did You do in the Great War?

              This impressive picture of Britannia is from
               the splendid 1916 issue of Bibby’s Annual]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration:

        THE ALLIES AND PROHIBITION—STOPPING DRINK TO WIN THE WAR

     The Drink Map before the War and on the 1000th day of the War

               CANADA—Prohibition almost from Sea to Sea
               FRANCE—Total Prohibition of Absinthe
               RUSSIA—Prohibition Everywhere
               BRITAIN—120,000 Drink shops open daily]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            The Wages of Sin


The time has come when it should be said that those responsible for our
country now stand on the very threshold of eternal glory or eternal
shame. They play and palter with the greatest enemy force outside
Berlin. The news from Vimy Ridge comes to a land whose rulers quail
before a foe within the gate.

Not for one hour has the full strength of Britain been turned against
her enemies. From the first day of the war, while our mighty Allies have
been striking down this foe within their gates, Britain has let this
trade stalk through her streets, serving the Kaiser’s purposes, and
paying the Government £1,000,000 a week for the right to do it.

She has let this trade destroy our food and bring us to the verge of
famine; she has let it keep back guns and shells and hold up ships; she
has let it waste our people’s wealth in hundreds of millions of pounds;
she has let it put its callous brake on the merciful Red Cross; she has
let it jeopardize the unity and safety of the Empire—for it may yet be
found, as Dr. Stuart Holden has so finely said, that the links that bind
the Pax Britannica are solvable in that great chemist’s solvent,
alcohol.

The witnesses are too great to number; we can only call a few. There is
no room for all those witnesses whose evidence is in the House of
Commons Return 220 (1915), showing the part drink played in the great
shell famine, in delaying ships and guns, and imperiling the Army and
the Fleet.

But the indictment is heavy. I charge this trade with the crime the King
laid at its door two years ago, the crime of prolonging the war; and the
witnesses are here at the bar of the people. The verdict is with them,
and the judgment is with those who rule.

_The wages of sin is death: What are the wages of those who fail in an
hour like this?_

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          Fiddling to Disaster

  We are not going to lose the war through the submarines if we all
  behave like reasonable human beings who want to save their country
  from disaster, privation and distress.

                                                  _The Prime Minister_


_What are we to say of a Government that plays with war and drink and
famine while these brave words are ringing in our ears?_

If the situation is so desperate that we must all go short of food, it
is desperate enough for the Government to be in earnest. But what are
the plain facts? No reasonable man who knows them can say that the
Government is in earnest.

It is not denied by anybody who knows the facts that drink has been the
greatest hindrance of the war. There is not a doubt that it has
prolonged the war for months and cost us countless lives. It is the duty
of the Government to face a dangerous thing like this; it is its duty to
pursue the war with a single eye to the speediest possible victory. But
the records of our war Governments in dealing with drink have been
records of fiddling and failure, and we stand in the third year of the
war with a Government fiddling still.

One thing will be perfectly clear if disaster and famine come. It will
be known to all the world that the Government knew the facts in time to
save us. We are in the war because we would not listen in times of
peace. We are in the third year of the war because we would not listen
in the first. We are faced with famine because we would not listen in
times of plenty, when drink was breaking down our food reserves. And we
are drifting now, nearer to disaster every day, because the Government
surrenders to the enemy worse than Germany.

It does not matter where you look, or when; the evidence of the fiddling
is everywhere about you. Take the week before the Prime Minister’s grave
speech about submarines—ending May 19.

  _Submarines destroyed 27 British cargoes, mostly over 1600 tons._

  =Brewers destroyed 27 British food cargoes, totaling 9000 tons.=

  _The granaries of Canada were crammed with wheat waiting for British
  ships, but there were no ships to bring this people’s food._

  =The rum quay at London Docks was crammed with casks of rum to last
  till 1920, but a ship arrived with 1000 Casks more.=

  _A woman was fined £5 for destroying a quartern loaf._

  =Brewers were fined nothing for destroying millions of loaves.=

  _Poor people waited in queues to buy sugar in London._

  =Cartloads of sugar were destroyed in London breweries.=

And so we might go on, looking on this picture and on that till the mind
almost reels with the solemn farce. The Prime Minister has suggested
that the farce does not end because those who demand its end cannot make
up their mind. It is the Government that cannot make up its mind.

  It tells Parliament that no more rum is to be imported, and goes on
  importing rum for years ahead.

  It forbids the use of spirits less than three years old, and reduces
  the three years to 18 months.

  It restricts beer to 10,000,000 barrels, and tells us one day that
  it is all-inclusive, and the next day that the Army Council can
  order as much extra beer as it likes.

  It issues a report saying that hops are not food, and gives up
  hundreds of thousands of feet to shipping them; 23,000 cubic feet
  the other week.

  It tells us that not an inch of shipping is wasted, and wastes
  shipping on bringing brewers’ vats from America and taking gin to
  Africa.

  It tells us that the Drink Trade gave up its distilleries
  patriotically, and leaves us to discover that it was made the
  subject of a bargain by which bread was being destroyed for whisky
  as late as May this year.

It is quite clear that the Government is desperately in need of a
scapegoat, and desperately in need of a defense. Prohibition Russia is
not mightily impressed with our drinking; serious Canadians are asking
how long they are to sacrifice their manhood to our brewers; America is
asking already why she should go short of bread in order that England
may drink more beer.

A Government must clearly say something in view of these things, and it
has put its defense in the care of one of the sanest and cleverest men
in the United Kingdom, Mr. Kennedy Jones. If Mr. Jones does not make out
a case for it, there is no case to make. What does he say?

1. _We are told that only five per cent. of malt can be mixed with flour
for bread._

All over the country this explanation is supposed to satisfy those
simple, honest people who know little about percentages but ask plain
questions at Food Economy meetings. It is preposterous nonsense. If we
have 200,000 tons of malted barley, what on earth does it matter whether
we mix it at fifty, or five, or two per cent., so long as we do mix it?
_It adds 200,000 tons to our bread in any case._ This talk of five per
cent., puzzling to people who think it means that only one-twentieth of
this malted barley can be used, is pitiful evidence, surely, of the
straits to which the Food Controller’s Defense Department is reduced.

2. _We are told that the barley destroyed for beer would give the nation
only ten days’ bread._

It would actually last us a fortnight. Drink, which has taken a quartern
loaf from every British cupboard in every week of the war, is taking
still a quartern loaf a month from every cupboard, and the desperate
appeals of Mr. Kennedy Jones will be more effective in saving crumbs
when he can tell us that he has stopped this monstrous destruction of
over 1,000 tons of grain a day.

3. _We are told that our munition workers are dependent on beer._

It is an astounding slander. However true it may be of Governments, it
is not true of our workmen. For four months the workman has been the
scapegoat of this Government in its surrender to this trade, and we are
asked at last to believe that these men who saved us from the Shell
Famine are willing to drink us into a Bread Famine. Does the Government
never pause to ask how millions of munition workers in America and
Canada and the United Kingdom manage without beer? Does nobody in the
Government know that the greatest steel furnaces in America are under
total Prohibition, and that two million American railwaymen are subject
to instant dismissal if they touch drink while on duty? Has the
Government not read its own report of the Royal Society Committee which
had this point in mind six months ago, and told us, on the highest
authority in this country, that soldiers march better and keep fitter
without alcohol; that men do more work on less energy without alcohol;
and that “the records of American industrial experience are significant
in showing a better output when no alcohol is taken by the workmen”?

4. _We are told we need this trade for yeast._

We need not bother overmuch about that. Industrial alcohol will give us
all we want, and there is no need to carry on this dangerous trade for
the sake of yeast. We do not need a single ounce of brewer’s yeast, and
we can do without distiller’s yeast as well by setting up a thousandth
part of the machinery we have set up in the last two years. Or, while we
must have yeast, we need about 30,000 tons a year for the whole United
Kingdom, and since the prohibition of hops in June last year _we have
given enough shipping to hops every fortnight to bring in enough yeast
for a year_. A Government with shipping to spare like that, with room on
its ships for mountains of hops, for enormous brewers’ vats, and for rum
for 1921, can find room for 100 tons a day of the people’s bread. It is
a monstrous perversion of the facts to suggest that we must maintain
this food-destroying trade, with all its hideous tragedy and ruin, in
order to make bread.

It cannot be said that a Government with such desperate excuses is in
earnest. We do not wonder that a great American farmers’ paper, with no
axe to grind except that it is sane and patriotic and believes in the
war, is asking plain questions as America prepares her Prohibition Army,
her Prohibition Navy, and stops the destruction of grain for drink in
order to enter the war at full strength.

Let the Food Controller, the Prime Minister, and every responsible
citizen of the United Kingdom read this—it is from the most influential
flour-milling paper in the world, the “North Western Miller,” published
in Minneapolis:

“=Since the United States will be called upon to make food sacrifices on
behalf of the Allies, it is certainly in order to call to account the
stewardship of Great Britain in regard to food supplies. Ordinarily
America would have no right to demand such an account, but Americans are
now asked to deny themselves that Britain may have sufficient.=

“=Britain has not seen fit to prohibit the use of cereals in the
manufacture of drink, notwithstanding that the world’s food supply was
obviously short. Are Americans required to forego a part of their
accustomed ration of bread in order that their British Allies can
continue to have a plentiful supply of beer and whisky? If not, then
Britain should lose no time in putting its house in order, quitting the
drink to add to the common store of food upon which the safety of all
the Allies depends.=

“=The food supply for the Allies is no longer a purely local
proposition, to be used as a football in British politics; it deeply
concerns the people of the United States, who are certainly not called
upon to deny themselves bread in order that Britain shall have drink.=”

What is the Government’s answer to this? “We owe a very considerable
debt of gratitude to the great American people for the effective
assistance they are rendering us,” says the Prime Minister. _Is this the
way we pay them back?_ It is an ugly question for our great Ally to have
to raise as she comes into the war, flinging her Prohibition Navy in to
smash the drink-made menace of the submarine. It is unthinkable that the
Government can read these bitter words unmoved, or can leave this stain
on our history in the face of all these questionings.

There is another question, too, that comes across the Atlantic. What is
the Government going to do with the soldiers of America’s Prohibition
Army, and the sailors of America’s Prohibition Navy, when they come over
here? Are they to be broken in their thousands, made useless and
degraded as thousands of men from Prohibition Canada have been, by the
enemy that traps them before they reach the war?

They are questions for the Government and the nation, and they must be
answered in the interests of the nation, and not to please the trade
that helps the Germans every day. We cannot afford to pay the appalling
price the future will demand unless our fiddlers change their tune.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                  The Drink Trade and Our War Services


=It is not possible to measure the strain the Drink Traffic has imposed
on our war services.=

The Food Controller’s Organization, with its great offices and staffs,
would not have been needed had we saved the food destroyed by drink.

Rationing already involves 1,200 committees, and may mean 50,000
officials and 50,000,000 tickets weekly. It could all be avoided.
Prohibition would save more bread without food controlling than all the
food controlling can save without Prohibition.

The National Service, with its network of officials, its costly
advertising, its absorption of paper and printing, could all have been
avoided under Prohibition. About 200,000 men have enrolled, but
Prohibition would give us twice that man-power any day.

The strain on a host of men and women looking after soldiers’ children
neglected through drink, soldiers’ wives spending allowances on drink,
is incalculable.

The strain on war charities and the strain on the police arising from
drink are both very great.

The strain of drink on doctors, nurses, and hospitals is beyond belief.
Prohibition would set free for the Red Cross thousands who waste their
time on the great drink trail.

The strain on transport is seen in the long lines of wagons drawn by
strong horses carting beer to public-houses. This year alone the
handling of drink must equal the lifting of at least 9,000,000 tons, and
the barrels of beer would fill nearly all the railway wagons in the
kingdom. As to ships, drink materials during the war have used up 60
ships of 5,000 tons working all the time.

On Lord Milner’s estimate of 19 barrels to the truck it would require
4,500,000 railway trucks to carry the 17,000,000 tons of beer
manufactured in the United Kingdom during the war.

=It can be proved from official figures that the weight of drink-stuff
carried about since war began has been equal to the weight of solid
material carried by the Navy to all our fighting fronts.=

It is a crying shame that the strength of Britain should be destroyed
like this in such an hour as this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                  The War-Work of the Food Destroyers


There are hundreds of great Food Destructors in the United Kingdom. The
man-power at their service, spread over our breweries and distilleries,
numbers hundreds of thousands of men; their capital is hundreds of
millions. This is a summary of the work they did in the first 1,000 days
of the war:

=They sacrificed 4,400,000 tons of grain and 340,000 tons of sugar,
enough to ration the whole United Kingdom with bread for 43 weeks and
sugar for 33 weeks.=

=They took from every kitchen cupboard in the land 600 pounds of bread
and 76 pounds of sugar.=

=They destroyed bread and sugar to last every child under fifteen for
every day of the war.=

=They took from our people over £512,000,000.=

=They used up labour and transport for lifting over 50,000,000 tons. By
sea they used up 60 ships of 5,000 tons; by rail their raw materials and
the finished products would make up a train long enough to reach nearly
round the world.=

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                 The Food Now Being Destroyed for Beer


Look at the actual facts about beer alone. We will ignore distilling, as
it gives us munitions and yeast. Had the Government tried to solve the
yeast question it could have solved it easily in these three years; it
would have had no more trouble with that problem than Russia and Canada
and America have had. But as the Government is still investigating the
yeast question, we will confine our figures to beer.

=Brewers are destroying 450,000 4-lb. loaves a day.=

=This year’s food destruction for beer alone will equal five weeks’
bread rations and four weeks’ sugar rations for the whole United
Kingdom.=

=We have seven critical weeks in this summer, and this year’s
destruction of food would carry us through.=

=Beer alone is taking 10 pounds of sugar a year from every kitchen
cupboard, and an ounce of sugar a day from every soldier.=

That is what drink is doing at this moment with the shadow of famine
creeping on.

 “_He who withholdeth the corn the people shall curse him._” Proverbs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          The Shadow of Famine


The Government came into office with the food shortage in sight; it was
its first duty to build up the great reserve of food we might have had
now in our granaries if the drink trade had not destroyed it. We could
have laughed at submarines, for our barns would have been filled to
overflowing, and we could have lived in comfort for a year if no ship
reached us.

Let us see how much food drink has destroyed during the war. We will
take it from August 4, 1914, to April 30, 1917. It is 999 days of the
war. The grain and sugar destroyed for drink have been:

               Grain                      4,400,000 tons
               Sugar (for beer alone)       340,000 tons

[Illustration:

  How Canada sees it—A Canadian cartoon of the callous destruction of
    bread for beer and whisky]

It is not easy to realize what this means, but it will help us if we
think of one or two examples.

=The biggest thing ever set up on earth is the Great Pyramid. It is
80,000,000 cubic feet. The food destroyed by drink during the war would
make two Great Pyramids, each bigger than the Pyramid of Egypt.=

=The longest British railway is the Great Western; it is over 3,000
miles, but it would not hold the food destroyed by drink since war
began. If every inch of it were crammed with wagons, the Great Western
Railway would need hundreds of miles more line to hold the train-loads
of food destroyed.=

=There are about 750,000 railway wagons in the United Kingdom, but if
the Drink Trade had them all they would not hold the food it has
destroyed.=

=There are about 30,000 engines on our British railways, and if the food
destroyed were made up in trains of 125 tons apiece, all our engines
would not pull them; we should still want 10,000 more.=

So vast is this incredible quantity of food destroyed by an enemy trade
while famine has been coming on. We should have saved it all if
Parliament had followed the King, and it would have given the whole
United Kingdom its flour rations for nearly a year. Take it at its
minimum scientific human food value, and on the basis of our rations in
May, 1917, it would have given us:

             Flour for the whole United Kingdom    43 weeks
             Sugar for the whole United Kingdom    33 weeks

Our three war Governments, confronted with the increasing certainty of
at least a three-years’ war, have allowed the Drink Trade to destroy
this vast reserve of food.

The full toll of this trade upon our scanty food supply, growing shorter
and shorter while the queues outside our food shops grow longer and
longer, is staggering indeed, even now with drink about three-quarters
stopped. We must remember that it makes no difference that the barley
has been malted; it is still good human food, and every ounce of it
should be mixed with grain for making bread. Let us remember, also, that
_brewer’s sugar is a good pure sugar_, the objection to it being largely
the objection most of us have to standard bread—its colour. Malt or
sugar, every ounce a brewer destroys is food stolen from the people. Let
us take expert opinion on the subject.


                    The Food Value of Brewer’s Sugar

  We do not, of course, use this dark sugar when white sugar is cheap
  and easily procurable, but during the war we have used it for
  coffee, cocoa, and tea; and for puddings where colour did not
  matter. We have used it a good deal in our bakeries for chocolate
  goods, where colour again does not matter. It is a good, pure sugar,
  and the colour is the principal drawback.

                          _Letter to Arthur Mee from a London caterer_


                    The Food Value of Brewer’s Malt

  Malt flour can be used to make excellent cake with 50 per cent.
  wheat flour. It is sweet and pleasant to taste without the need of
  any sugar. Good scones can be made with 25 per cent. of malt flour.
  Its use in bread made with yeast causes too much fermentation in the
  bread, but it has no effect on baking-powder. The Food Controller’s
  Department is aware of the practicability of using malt flour, but
  the sale is restricted in order to limit its use for making beer.
  Brewers and maltsters are too patriotic to wish to use for beer what
  could be applied to food in case of a serious shortage, and the
  large stocks of barley and malt can supplement the supply of wheat
  flour.

                 _Letter from a Brewer in the “Times,” April 11, 1917_

Yet we have seen our Government holding up sugar for brewers; we have
seen our Food Controller refuse to release a caterer’s sugar unless it
were sold to a brewer; we have seen a Government short of food-ships
bringing in brewers’ vats and casks of rum; and we see the Government
still holding up this malt that would feed a people asking for more
bread.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          The Tunes They Play


Strange tunes we hear the fiddlers play, but their music does not charm
away the troubles of a famine-threatened land. From morning till night
the prayer of the people rises, “Give us this day our daily bread,” but
the heart of Downing Street is hardened, and the nation’s bread goes day
by day to the destroyer.

But all the time we see the measure of the courage of our rulers on the
hoardings in the streets. We know their posters by heart.

_Defeat the enemy’s attempt to starve you_, by—not by stopping the
destruction of food, but by joining the National Service, and probably
helping to pick hops. There was a man in a co-operative store who
volunteered for National Service, and last month he received
instructions _to leave the grocery store and take up duty in a brewery_.

_Sow your window-boxes and plant your back gardens_—and Mr. Prothero
will see that the soil of a million back gardens is wasted on hops.

_We have not enough food to last till the harvest_—why not go out and
catch rabbits, asks Lord Devonport—and sit and wait for sparrows?

_We must save every pound of bread we can to get over our critical
weeks_—not by saving the quartern loaf that beer is taking every month
from every British cupboard now, but by going hungry so that drinkers
may not thirst.

_We must not eat more than our share, on our honour_—but the man across
the table can eat his share of bread and drink somebody else’s too.

_We must eat less and eat slowly_—so that brewers may waste more and
waste quickly.

_We must keep back famine_—but not by using malt, says Captain Bathurst:
that would cost three times as much as letting famine come. _But why not
keep the malt till bread is as dear as gold?_

_Let all heads of households abstain from using grain except in bread_,
says the King’s Proclamation. But let the brewers waste 8,000 tons a day
for beer, says the Government.

_God speed the plough and the woman who drives it_—yes, and God help the
woman who drives the plough to feed the brewer while her little ones cry
for bread.

_Let us fine £5 whoever wastes a loaf_, says the Food Controller—but
not, of course, the brewers who waste 450,000 quartern loaves a day.

Hops are no use as food to anybody, says the Board of Trade Scientific
Committee. “_Then let us grow only half as many_,” said Mr. Prothero.

Mr. Lloyd George says Mr. Prothero is working “in a continuous rattle of
mocking laughter and gibes.” Yes, it is the mocking laughter of a nation
that is not really amused by sights like this. The nation does not like
to see the bread rations of 70,000 men in France cut down while the
Drink Trade is destroying every week bread enough to last these men a
year. It does not like to see the Government sending letters out to
managers of factory canteens, begging them to be careful of bread, while
food flows through our beer canteens like a river running to waste. It
does not like to see Y. M. C. A. canteens denied supplies of sugar while
barrels of beer are stacked in great piles outside. It does not like the
calling up of discharged soldiers while thousands of strong men are
working hard all day destroying food or carting beer about the streets;
and it does net like the tragic comedies of Captain Bathurst, who warns
us that it really may become necessary in the national interest—and
then, perhaps, he drops his voice to break it very gently—it really may
become necessary, if these cake shops are not very careful, _to
whitewash the lower part of their windows_.

Oh, these fiddlers! And now we have a new idea from the Food Control
Department; it is a coloured poster of a Union Jack and a big loaf on
it, and “Waste not, Want not,” printed in big type. It was being printed
on the day the Prime Minister told the nation that America had found it
is no use waving a neutral flag in the teeth of a shark. It is an
eloquent and true saying, but it is also true, that it is no use waving
platitudes from copybooks in the teeth of a wolf at the door. The Prime
Minister says he is taking no chances. Let us be quite sure. We once had
a Government of which men said its motto was “Wait and See.” _Are we
better off, or are we worse, with a Government that Sees and Waits?_

But there is no end to the fiddling. With Food Controllers who hold up
food for Food Destroyers; with Food Economy Handbooks that cry out loud
to save the crumbs but have no word to say about the tons we fling away;
with a Prime Minister praying for window-boxes and a Board of
Agriculture consecrating hopfields, we need not be surprised if the
nation is not mightily impressed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                         How the Allies Did It


All the world knows, except, apparently, the world that goes round at
Westminster, how Prohibition has helped the Allies.

_With the Shell Famine at its height—largely made by Drink—the
Prohibition Army on the East held up the enemy while Britain fought the
Drink Trade for her shells._

_With the Bread Famine looming in sight—largely made by Drink—the
Prohibition Navy from the West flings in her power against the
submarines._

Oh, for the spirit of our Allies in this land! If France wants to rouse
the spirit of Verdun she strikes down her foe at home and puts absinthe
away. If Russia wants to be great and free she stops this drink and
orders out the Romanoffs. If Canada wants to give her utmost help to
Britain she stops this drink from sea to sea. If Australia wants to make
her soldiers fit she trains them in her Prohibition camps. If America
wants to beat the whole world at making shells she drives drink from her
workshops. If San Francisco has an earthquake she stops drink while she
pulls herself together. If Liverpool has a dangerous strike she shuts up
public-houses and keeps the city quiet. Oh, for a Government of Britain
that will see what all the world can see!

History will do justice to the part the Prohibition policy of the Allies
has played in saving Europe, but a pamphlet has no room for these
things. We can take only one or two great witnesses to the mighty
achievements of our Prohibition Allies. Let us begin with France, and
call our own Prime Minister to tell us what they did. Mr. Lloyd George:

  One afternoon we had to postpone our conference in Paris, and the
  French Minister of Finance said, “I have to go to the Chamber of
  Deputies, because I am proposing a bill to abolish absinthe.”
  Absinthe plays the same part in France that whisky plays in this
  country, and they abolished it by a majority of something like ten
  to one that afternoon.

And how did Paris take this prohibition that men said would cause a
revolution? Let us ask Mr. Philip Gibbs, whose splendid letters home
have made his name a household word. Mr. Philip Gibbs:

  Absinthe was banned by a thunderstroke, and Parisians who had
  acquired the absinthe habit trembled in every limb at this judgment
  which would reduce them to physical and moral wrecks. But the edict
  was given and Paris obeyed, loyally and with resignation.

And now we come to Russia, to these mighty Russian people who in the
last year of vodka saved £6,000,000 or £7,000,000, and in the last full
year of Prohibition saved £177,000,000. We will call our own Prime
Minister again:

  Russia, knowing her deficiency, knowing how unprepared she was,
  said, “I must pull myself together. I am not going to be trampled
  upon, unready as I am. I will use all my resources.” What is the
  first thing she does? She stops drink.

  I was talking to M. Bark, the Russian Minister of Finance, and I
  asked, “What has been the result?” He said, “The productivity of
  labour, the amount of work which is put out by the workmen, has gone
  up between 30 and 50 per cent.”

  I said, “How do they stand it without their liquor?” and he replied,
  “Stand it? I have lost revenue over it up to £65,000,000 a year and
  we certainly cannot afford it, but if I proposed to put it back
  there would be a revolution in Russia.”

How completely teetotal Russia became we read long ago in the _Daily
Mail_, to which Mr. Hamilton Fyfe sent this message from Petrograd:

  Try to imagine all the publichouses in the British Isles closed; all
  the restaurants putting away their wine cards and offering nothing
  stronger than cider or ginger ale. That is the state of things in
  Russia. Strange it seems indeed, yet there is one thing stranger.
  Nobody makes any audible complaint.

Everywhere in Russia it was the same: a nation was made sober by Act of
Parliament.

  “Without a murmur of protest,” said the Moscow correspondent of the
  _Times_, “the most drunken city in Europe was transformed into a
  temple of sobriety, and we felt that if Russia could thus conquer
  herself in a night, there was indeed nothing that might not be
  accomplished.” And two years later, when the revolution came, we
  read in the _Times_ this note from Odessa: “Perfect tranquillity
  continues to prevail here, although for the moment Odessa is
  practically without police. The satisfactory absence of crime may
  largely be attributed to the sealing up of spirituous liquors.”

We need not be afraid of Drinkless Revolutions.

But the truth about Russia is almost too incredible to believe, for it
is Prohibition that made the revolution possible; it was stopping drink
that set 170,000,000 people free. We will let a business correspondent
of the _Times_ give evidence; here is what he said on April 21, 1917:

  In one respect it must be said that the Reactionaries saw clearly.
  They always claimed that the Tsar had ruined himself by decreeing
  the abolition of vodka. None but a sober people could have carried
  out the Russian Revolution.

  The police were, on the other hand, the victims of drink. They had
  seized the vodka at the order of the Government, and had kept
  plentiful supplies for themselves. Thus the Revolution was in part a
  struggle between drunken reaction and sober citizens. Sobriety
  triumphed.

The Russian people will not bow down and tie their hands to the thrones
of Europe: do we wonder if they scorn our quailing before this trade?

Free Russia flings off the dynastic yoke: do we wonder Prohibition
Russia is not much impressed by a nation with a Drink Trade round its
neck?

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           The Soldier’s Home


The things that will be told against this trade when all the truth is
known will break the heart of those who read. It is well for us that we
cannot know the full truth now; the burden would be too grievous to be
borne in days like these. But if you will go into your street, or will
talk of these things with the next man you meet from one of our pitiful
slums, or will pick up one of those local papers that still have space
to print the truth, you will find the evidence close about you.

We are the guardians of our soldiers’ homes; we are the trustees of the
hope and happiness of their little children; but we let this drink
trade, that takes our people’s food out of their cupboards, turn that
food into the means of death, and sow ruin and destruction through the
land.

But we will call the witnesses to these drink-ruined soldiers’ homes,
these homes that the enemy worse than Germany has shattered and broken
while our men have been fighting for your home and mine. We will call a
few here and there, knowing that for every one called are hundreds more
that can be called, and that beyond all these that are known there is in
this little land a countless host of tragedies as secret as the grave.

  A Tooting soldier whose wife had sent him loving letters to the
  trenches came back to surprise her after 18 months. He found another
  man in possession of his home and a new baby; and, overcome by the
  discovery, he gave way to drink and killed himself.

                               _Records of Balham Coroner, March 1916_

  A soldier who had left a comfortable home behind returned from the
  Front to find it ruined, with not a bed to lie on, his children
  never sent to school, his wife all the time in publichouses. “I wish
  I had been shot in the trenches,” he said when he arrived.

                     _Facts in “Cork Constitution,” December 10, 1915_

  Outside a publichouse in Liverpool a man was dragging home his
  drunken wife, the mother of eleven children. They rolled over and
  over on the ground, the drunken women violently resisting the
  maddened man. Then came up the eldest son, home from the Front, with
  five wounds in his body.

                            _Facts in “Liverpool Post,” March 2, 1917_

  A soldier came back to his home in London to find his wife drinking
  his money away, harbouring another man; one of his children cruelly
  neglected and the other in its grave, perished from neglect; and a
  drunken carman’s baby about to be born in his home.

                                 _Facts in Shaftesbury Society Report_

  A Lance-Corporal heard in the trenches of his wife’s misconduct. His
  commanding officer wrote to make inquiries, and the soldier wrote to
  the Chief Constable a pitiful letter: “What have I to look forward
  to at the end of the war?” he said. “Nothing, only sorrow. I never
  get a letter to know how my loving son is getting on; I think it
  will drive me mad.”

  He came home, opened the door of his house, threw his kit on the
  floor, and declared that he would kill his wife. He put a razor on
  the table, and his little boy hid it in a cupboard, but a week later
  this boy of 12 went home and found his father and mother lying on
  the floor, the father drunk, the mother dead. The soldier, drowning
  his misery in drink, had strangled his wife. Rousing himself beside
  her, he said, as the police found them, “Kiss me, Sally. Aye, but
  tha are poorly.”

  He had been the best of fathers, said the little boy; the best of
  soldiers, said his commanding officer; and the judge declared that
  such a man, with such a character, ought not to be with criminals.

                         _Record of Huddersfield Assizes, Autumn 1916_

  A soldier asked a London magistrate if he could draw the allowance
  instead of his wife, who was in prison for drunkenness and was
  neglecting his four children. The magistrate said the only thing was
  to send the children to the workhouse.

  The Soldier: “So I am to be a soldier for my King and country while
  my children go to the workhouse?” The Magistrate: “That is so,
  because you have a drunken wife. I am sorry for you.”

                                 _Facts in “Sunday Herald,” June 1916_

  A seaman gunner, who had been torpedoed and had fought in the
  trenches, arrived home to find his wife, in his own words, “filthy
  drunk,” and his children utterly deplorable. He reclothed them, but
  his wife pawned the clothes, though she had £7 a month. He took his
  children away, but a crowd of women interfered with him, and the
  police were powerless against the mob.

                     _Facts in “Western Daily Mercury,” July 23, 1915_

  A soldier just back from the Front was found in the street weeping
  bitterly on discovering that his wife was in gaol through drink, and
  his child, through her neglect, had been burned.

                               _Statement by Marchioness of Waterford_

  A soldier came home from the Front to find that drink had ruined his
  home, and his children were being cared for by Glasgow Parish
  Council. “Hour after hour we sit on this council,” says the
  chairman, “listening to case after case, and the cause is
  drunkenness, drunkenness, drunkenness. There are 2300 children under
  the council, and two thousand of them have parents living.” “Our raw
  material is the finished product of the public-house,” says one of
  these workers.

                                      _Facts from Glasgow Councillors_

  A motor mechanic at the Front, hearing that his wife, hitherto a
  sober woman, had given way to drink, obtained leave to come home. He
  found his wife, very drunk, struggling home with the help of the
  railings in the street, and neighbours described her horrible life
  with other soldiers. The husband obtained a separation for the sake
  of his children, and went back to France.

                       _Full facts in “Kent Messenger,” July 31, 1915_

  A young soldier came from the trenches to spend Christmas in his
  home in Sheffield—a teetotal home before the war. He found that his
  wife had given way to drink, had deserted one child and disappeared
  with the other, and that a baby was to be born which was not his.

                                           _Facts known to the Author_

  A miner fighting at the Front came home to find his wife at a
  publichouse, his home filthy, and his children cruelly neglected. He
  was heartbroken. His young wife frequently left the house from
  tea-time till midnight, and in order to keep the children from the
  fire she had burned them severely with a piece of iron. A
  respectable-looking woman, the mother pleaded for a chance, and was
  led from the dock sobbing bitterly.

                 _Facts in “Sheffield Independent,” February 21, 1917_

  A young Yorkshire miner enlisted and left his wife, hitherto sober,
  with three children. She took to drink, neglected the home, and is
  now a dipsomaniac, with two children not her husband’s.

                                           _Facts known to the Author_

  A soldier came home ill from France, hurried from Waterloo to his
  home, and found the door locked. He knocked, and his little boy’s
  voice came—“Is that you, mother, and are you drunk?” Hearing his
  father’s voice the excited lad opened the door. “Where’s mother?”
  asked his father. “Mother?” said the boy; “she’s drinking. She comes
  home drunk night after night now and knocks the kids about. She
  daren’t hit _me_; I’m fair strong, dad; but the other.... And as for
  baby, she never does nothing for her. I and Freddy takes turns, but
  I dunno what to give her to eat sometimes.”

  Midnight passed before the mother appeared, helplessly drunk. “Did
  you expect me to sit at home weeping for you?” she said. The next
  morning, broken with tears, she promised to mend her ways. The
  soldier went into hospital, and there he had a letter from his boy.
  This is part of it:

  “Dear Dad, I write to let you know mother is going on awful. She has
  took all Fred and Timmy’s clothes to the pawnshop, and she hit
  Selina on Saturday with the toasterfork and cut her face. She cried
  all night, it hurt her so. She is drunk every night and some nights
  dussent come back at all. She daren’t hit me, but I am getting
  afraid about baby. We are all very hungry and miserable.”

  The soldier got leave, found his wife had disappeared, and, finding
  charity for his four little ones, he left his ruined home and went
  back to the hospital.

                                   _Facts in possession of the Author_

  A working-man at Gravesend went to the Front, leaving behind a wife
  and three children, the baby lately born. His wife started drinking
  away her allowance, neglected her home, and, full of remorse and
  shame for the disgrace she had brought on the man who was in the
  trenches, she hanged herself. The man came home to find waiting for
  him three motherless children, and one of the most pathetic letters
  a man has ever had to read.

                                  _Records of Gravesend Coroner, 1916_


                          Mothers and Children

It is easy to understand the pitiful appeal of 500 women out of Holloway
Prison who begged the Duchess of Bedford to help to close all
public-houses during the war. They know in their hearts of tragedies
such as these, in which mothers and children die while the fathers fight
and the Drink Trade goes on merrily.

  A soldier’s wife in Sunderland drew £12 arrears of Army pay, and she
  and her mother began to drink it away. She drew her pay on Friday,
  was carried home drunk on Saturday, gave birth to twins on Sunday
  morning, and died on Sunday night. The twins died a week or two
  after, and a week or two after that the soldier came home from the
  trenches to find his family in the grave.

                                    _Facts in Sunderland papers, 1917_

  Two women went drinking in Chester on a Sunday night, a soldier’s
  mother and a soldier’s wife. They had five whiskies each, and fell
  drunk in the street. One slept all night on a sofa, and the other
  lay on the floor, shouting and swearing. Her husband propped her up
  with a mat, and for hours she lay shrieking. In the morning she was
  dead. The publican was fined £5.

                     _Facts in “Chester Chronicle,” February 17, 1917_

  The wife of a Yorkshire soldier was drowned while drunk at
  Sheffield. She started drinking with another soldier’s wife
  disappeared with a drunken man, and her death was a mystery.

                    _Facts in “Sheffield Independent,” April 26, 1916_

  At an inquest on the bodies of a soldier’s twin children, both dead
  from chronic wasting, it was stated that the mother had 34_s._ a
  week, and both she and her husband drank. The mother had had four
  children in fifteen months, and all were dead.

                          _Records of Battersea Coroner, October 1915_

  In one street in London where there were one day four convictions
  for drunkenness, a woman carried a sick baby into a public house. As
  she stood at the bar the little baby died, but the mother went on
  drinking, with the dead child in her arms.

                             _Records of Charity Organisation Society_

  The wife of a highly-esteemed sergeant-major fighting in France was
  found lying drunk. Her four children, shockingly neglected, were put
  in a home, but she took them out, went on drinking, and received
  soldiers at her house. In a few weeks her husband heard in the
  trenches that his wife had died from drinking.

                          _Records of West Surrey Coroner, March 1917_

  A soldier left three children at home. He had been earning £1 a
  week, but his wife received 32_s._ 6_d._ a week. She drank it away,
  neglected the children, and died in an asylum while her husband was
  in France.

                                          _Records of Claybury Asylum_

  The little child of a soldier in France died in Guy’s Hospital from
  burns. The mother said she could not buy a fireguard. While she was
  absent the baby was burned, and the mother, returning in a drunken
  state carrying a can of beer, said, “A good job!”

                         _Records of Southwark Coroner, December 1915_

  A soldier’s widow with six children, an Army pension of 30_s._ a
  week, and her eldest boy’s wages of 30_s._, drinks every night with
  a married man who has a respectable, clean, and sober wife with
  eight children and a ninth lately born—born prematurely as a result
  of her husband’s beating her. The child bore the marks of his
  violence, and died in two months.

                                      _Records of Shaftesbury Society_

  The young wife of a soldier was brought from prison to be tried for
  manslaughter of her baby, who had died in the infirmary from
  neglect. She spent her time in the publichouses, and laughed when
  the children were taken to the infirmary. She went out one day to
  fetch a bottle of whisky and as she drank with a neighbour she said
  she knew the baby would die. The doctor said the child’s skin was
  hanging in folds on the bones.

                           _Facts in the “Observer,” January 23, 1916_

  A soldier’s wife drank continuously while her child wasted away,
  left the tiny baby alone in the house while she went for beer, and a
  policeman found her lying drunk across the dead child’s body.

                         _Records of Barnsley Coroner, November, 1916_

  The mother of two children whose father was fighting in France gave
  way to drink in his absence, neglected her children and left them in
  grave moral danger, and committed suicide.

                                           _Records of an Orphan Home_

  A soldier’s baby starved slowly to death as the mother drank away
  his pay, and while the child lay in its coffin the mother was out
  drinking.

                             _West Bromwich Police Records, June 1915_

  A munition worker at Newcastle was grievously upset by the drinking
  habits of his wife. The police left a summons for her and she
  disappeared. Two days later her body was found in the Tyne. The man
  broke down at the inquest, saying, between his sobs: “She was such a
  good wife to me for 20 years, and reared a good family before she
  took to drink.”

                           _Records of Newcastle Coroner, Summer 1916_

  The wife of a corporation workman at Sheffield, home from the
  trenches with six gunshot wounds and three pieces of shell in his
  body, found that his wife had given way to drink and starved her
  five children. She was sent to prison for six months.

                       _Police Records of Sheffield, November 3, 1915_

  A soldier’s wife who had spent the greater part of £100 Army money
  in drink was sent to prison for neglecting her children. Almost
  everything in the house was pawned, including the children’s
  clothes; and the woman began to drink at five o’clock in the
  morning, and went on drinking all day.

                     _Facts in “Cork Constitution,” December 10, 1915_

  A soldier’s wife in Monmouthshire, with £3 9_s._ a week, was found
  sodden with drink, while the soldier’s eight children were in rags
  starving by day and huddling up in one bed by night.

                       _Facts in “Westminster Gazette,” July 22, 1916_

  A smart tidy woman in a London suburb, whose husband is fighting in
  Mesopotamia, has £2 10_s._ 6_d._ a week. She used to love her
  children and had a happy home, but she drinks away her Army pay,
  lives with a married man who has six children, and has become a
  drunken slattern. The other wife is beaten and neglected, and the
  soldier’s children have gone to the workhouse.

                                      _Records of Shaftesbury Society_

  The four children of a soldier in Dublin were found hungry and
  shivering with cold while the mother was drinking. Several times she
  had let her baby fall while reeling with it in the street.

                  _Facts in “Dublin Evening Herald,” October 20, 1916_

  At the trial of a soldier’s wife for drinking and neglecting seven
  children, it was stated that a child of eleven was left in charge of
  a baby a fortnight old while the mother was drinking. At night all
  the children were heard screaming. The house was in utter darkness,
  and there was an escape of gas. Some men went in and turned off the
  gas, and at last the mother came stumbling out of a publichouse
  across the road.

                        _Facts in “Sheffield Star,” November 25, 1915_

  “Your husband is fighting for his country, and his children have the
  right to be protected,” said the Chairman of the Chesterfield Bench
  to a soldier’s wife. Her children were found starving while she was
  drinking, and one day the little boy of three was found crouching
  naked inside the fender, trying to get warm. The police described
  the house as foul from top to bottom, with a heap of horrible rags
  for a bed, and a food cupboard that made the house unendurable when
  the door was opened.

                      _Facts in “Yorkshire Telegraph,” March 24, 1916_

  The wife of a missing soldier was sent to prison at Chesterfield for
  neglecting three children between 13 years and 16 weeks old. She had
  gone astray through drink, and the youngest child, born under
  terrible conditions, was not her husband’s. It was found lying on a
  filthy bed, and its drunken mother, to satisfy its pangs of hunger,
  had given it pennyworths of laudanum. Eleven people slept in two
  foul bedrooms.

                        _Chesterfield Police Records, October 9, 1916_

  Five hundred children of soldiers are being cared for in the great
  Homes founded by Mr. Quarrier in Scotland, and most of them are
  there because of drinking mothers.

                                                    _Facts in Reports_

  A soldier’s wife at Biggleswade spent her allowance on drink and
  left her three children locked up in the house for days at a time.

                 _Police Court Records of Biggleswade, September 1915_

  A soldier’s wife was found reeling in the streets of Dublin with a
  baby in her arms. At her home were found four other children,
  cruelly neglected.

                             _Facts in “Dublin Mail,” August 16, 1916_

  Nineteen hundred children of soldiers have come into the care of the
  N.S.P.C.C., mainly through drink, since the war began.

                                           _Records of the N.S.P.C.C._


                            The Ruined Wives

Who does not remember the terrible rush for the last drop of drink when
Prohibition seemed to be coming with the New Year? Long queues of women
besieged the whisky shops in Glasgow. There were women of all ages, said
the _Daily Mail_, tottering in grey hairs, young wives with babies in
their arms, and men of the loafer type. “There was not a respectable
citizen,” says the _Mail_, “who did not deplore this discreditable
scene, but the remarks of passers-by provoked only torrents of insult.”
The promise of the new year and the new Government, alas, was not
fulfilled, and now in place of Drink Queues we have Food Queues. Let us
see what drink is doing among our soldiers’ wives:

  Of 3000 soldiers’ wives being cared for in South London, 2000 are
  splendid, while 1000 are sinking daily to lower and lower levels
  through drink.

                                      _Records of Shaftesbury Society_

  A soldier’s wife, with a separation allowance of 32_s._ 6_d._ a
  week, drank most of it away, ruined her home, neglected her
  children, and became a lunatic.

                                          _Records of Claybury Asylum_

  A young soldier’s wife, hitherto “quite an elegant type,” is rapidly
  becoming a drunkard. Women hitherto sober have not the courage to
  keep from women’s drinking parties, and young girls come out of
  factories and go to publichouses in little groups.

                             _Records of Charity Organisation Society_

  Outside a public house in Dublin 15 small children were crying in
  the cold, waiting for their mothers. Ninety-four drunken women came
  out in 25 minutes. There were ten drunken soldiers, and two girls of
  15 were thrown into the street hopelessly drunk.

                              _Facts in “Irish Times,” April 20, 1915_

  In Dundee over 170 wives of soldiers gave way to drink last year,
  and cruelly neglected their homes.

                                       _Records of the N. S. P. C. C._

  A soldier in the trenches received a letter from his little boy,
  which he sent to London with a pitiful appeal for help.

  “Kindly do what you can for me and the well-being and welfare of my
  four beautiful children,” the poor soldier wrote. “I am enclosing a
  fearful letter I have received from my poor little lad, 14-1/2, the
  first and only letter I have received from him. Sir, I shall be most
  anxiously awaiting your reply, for this letter is the greatest blow
  I have ever received.”

  This is the little boy’s letter:

    Dear Dad: Just a line to let you know how everything is at home.
    Mother is drunk for a fortnight and sober for a week for months
    and months. I’ve stuck it now for seven months, and can’t stick
    it any longer. I tried to get into the Navy and passed all the
    tests, but mother would not sign the papers, for which I am
    sorry. If mum would sign I could go away to Portsmouth on
    Thursday, but she will not. At the present moment she is half
    drunk and keeps jawing me so that I could knife meself. I’ve
    lost my new job because mum would not wake me in the morning,
    and nothing for breakfast, and had to get mine and the
    children’s tea at tea-time. It pains me to write like this, but
    I can’t help it. I now seek your advice as to what to do. I hope
    _you_ will enjoy Xmas, although there is not much hope for us. I
    now conclude with fondest love, X. Your heartbroken Son, Leslie.

  A stream of nearly 15,000 men and women poured into 58 publichouses
  in Birmingham in less than four hours; over 6,000 were women. Into
  one house the people streamed at nearly 500 an hour.

                          _Facts in “Review of Reviews,” October 1915_

  For months some wives of soldiers and sailors in Scotland were never
  really sober. “We have done our best,” says a worker among them,
  “going to their homes and doing all in our power, but it beats us.”
  In 23 families, with 178 children born, 61 were dead.

                     _Facts told to Secretary for Scotland, July 1916_

               Will some Member of Parliament please ask

=whether the ships that have brought in food for destruction by the
drink trade could not have brought in a large proportion of the
3,500,000 tons of wheat now waiting for ships in Australia and the
2,000,000 tons waiting in Canada?=

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          The Roll of the Dead


No more pitiful record of the war is there than that unnumbered roll of
men lured from our armies by this liquor trade, and cast into
dishonoured graves. We can take only a few of them.

  A number of soldiers at Ormskirk came into camp drunk on Christmas
  night. A request for quiet led to a fight, and one of the men was
  struck two blows and was dead the next morning.

                            _Facts in “Daily Mail,” December 28, 1915_

  A Liverpool soldier, drinking continuously, had overstayed his
  leave, and in a quarrel about this he stabbed his brother dead.

                        _Facts in “Liverpool Courier,” April 20, 1917_

  A soldier invalided from France, having recovered from his wounds,
  gave way to drink, assaulted an officer, and hanged himself in his
  prison cell.

                               _Facts in “Daily News,” April 11, 1916_

  A young lieutenant shot himself in an hotel near Trafalgar Square,
  and among the documents read at the inquest was a letter striking
  him off his battalion for drinking and gross carelessness.

                        _Facts in “Daily Chronicle,” October 27, 1916_

  A captain in the Army ruined by drink, with a fine record of
  military service, started drinking on his way to a shooting range in
  London, and in a struggle he shot a detective dead.

                           _Facts in “Daily News,” September 20, 1915_

  In the Scottish Express, between Doncaster and Selby, a drunken
  corporal of the Coldstream Guards was showing his rifle to a friend
  when it went off, the bullet killing a munitions works director in
  the next compartment, and narrowly escaping a lady in the
  compartment beyond. The corporal had in his pocket a bottle of
  whisky, which was freely handed round.

                             _Facts in “Daily News,” December 3, 1915_

  A soldier who had been drinking heavily was placed in the guard
  room, and died after a night of groaning, evidently as the result of
  a fall.

                       _Records of Greenwich Coroner, January 1, 1915_

  A young soldier arriving from India on Christmas morning was
  arrested three days later, after a drunken fight in which a man was
  killed.

                       _Westminster Police Records, December 28, 1914_

  A soldier spent a day’s leave in Manchester, ate and drank very
  heavily, and was found dead the next morning from choking.

                    _Records of Manchester Coroner, December 28, 1914_

  A soldier home on leave was found drunk with his wife. They had been
  throwing pots at one another, and on Christmas morning the woman was
  found dead with a wound in her head.

                        _Records of Oldham Coroner, December 24, 1914_

  Three gunners had four drinks each of rum, and at midnight lay down
  to sleep in a garden at Lee, where one was found dying from alcohol.

                             _Facts in Local Papers at Lee, June 1915_

  A soldier died from alcohol in a house where drink was unlawfully
  sold.

                       _Facts in “Manchester Guardian,” April 8, 1915_

  A private in the Welsh Fusiliers died from alcohol, cold and
  exposure. He left a publichouse with a 4_s._ bottle of whisky, and
  was found dead on the roadside next morning, with the bottle almost
  empty.

                               _Facts in “Daily News,” April 13, 1915_

  An old man who was said to be in a drunken condition was wounded in
  a fall with a soldier from Gallipoli, and died a few days after.

                             _Facts in “Daily Mail,” January 17, 1916_

  An elderly man, seeing a drunken soldier lying in the street, went
  to his assistance, and was killed in a disturbance that followed.

                      _Record of Yorkshire Assizes, November 21, 1916_

  A soldier was found drowned in the Trent. He was described as a good
  man at his work, but not steady, and had been drinking.

                        _Facts in “Newark Advertiser,” August 4, 1915_

  A terrible disturbance occurred in a camp at Portland Reservoir
  after the closing of the canteen one Sunday night. A large number of
  men who had been drinking created a disturbance, in which bricks and
  stones were used, a tent collapsed, and the officers were called to
  quell the riot. The captain, drawing his revolver, rushed with two
  lieutenants into a hut where men were shouting and struggling, but
  appeals had no effect—the men “did not appear to hear or recognize
  their officers,” and one man raised his rifle and took aim at them.
  At least fifty shots were fired, and a young corporal fired many
  shots through the window into the darkness. In the morning a soldier
  was found dead. Nobody knew who shot him, but the corporal thought
  he must have done.

                              _Records of Dorset Assizes, Spring 1915_

               Will some Member of Parliament please ask

=whether it is true that more food is being destroyed each week in
breweries and distilleries than by submarines?=

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            The New Drinkers


“_No complaints have reached the War Office of youths who were total
abstainers having become confirmed drunkards since enlistment._”

So we are told in the House of Commons. The records of the War Office
are clearly incomplete, and the information from the camps may here be
supplemented by unchallengeable witnesses of what happens in the
horrible drink canteens run by the Army Council.

  A soldier who was wounded at La Bassée, a total abstainer until
  then, was sentenced at the Old Bailey for killing his uncle while
  drunk. He was a newsvendor, aged 21, and had no memory of the
  tragedy in which he killed his uncle at a Christmas party.

                        _Facts in “Daily Chronicle,” January 13, 1916_

  A private in the Royal Scots Fusileers, aged 17, was charged with
  murdering a bugler boy, aged 16, in his regiment. The private became
  mad drunk in the camp canteen, went back to his hut, locked himself
  in and fired two shots, one of which entered another hut and killed
  the bugler. “Was there no one with power to say how much drink
  should be given?” asked the judge, and an officer said there was no
  one. “Then it was high time power was given to the commanding
  officer,” said the judge. “Was there to be no restraining hand to
  prevent young boys from fuddling themselves in canteens?”

                             _Facts in the “Times,” November 21, 1916_

  An old man sat in a tram in great distress. He had lost his boy at
  the Front. When he joined the Army he had never tasted alcohol, but
  when he came home on leave to see his mother he was drunk every
  night. He was drunk the night he went away, and in three days he was
  dead. “The last we saw of him,” said the poor old man between his
  sobs, “was his going away drunk, and his mother, who is
  old-fashioned in her faith, cannot get it out of her mind that no
  drunkard can enter the Kingdom of God.”

                                    _Facts told by Dr. Norman Maclean_

  Many young officers, called upon to share the wine bill at mess,
  naturally say, “If I have to pay I may as well drink my share,” and
  one man accounted for ten glasses of champagne. On a Guest night in
  his mess several more “were under the table.”

                        _Facts in “Dublin Daily Express,” April 1916._

  A boy got his V.C., and came home wounded. The publican in his
  street sounded his praises in the taproom, where they subscribed to
  the bar for 120 pints for him when he arrived. He came home and
  began to drink it, and was nearly dead with it before he was
  rescued.

                                  _Facts related by Bishop of Lincoln_

  When the Scottish Horse Brigade were at Perth whisky was literally
  forced down the men, and they were inundated with floods of bad
  women.

                                 _Brigadier-General Lord Tullibardine_

  A teetotal household had two boys in an officers’ training camp, and
  they gave pitiable accounts of drinking. Boys from school had a
  drunken sergeant put over them, and a canteen in the midst of them.
  “Our boys never saw drink before,” one father wrote.

                                 _From a letter to Dr. Norman Maclean_

  A boy of 17, discharged from the Navy, spent 8_s._ one night on beer
  and rum, and created a disturbance in a workshop at Sheffield.

                        _Facts in “Sheffield Star,” November 11, 1916_

  Mr. Justice Atkin, charging the Grand Jury at Bristol, said that in
  nearly every case where a soldier was tried in the Western Circuit
  the defence was drink. One lad of 18 was treated to eight pints of
  beer in two hours, and did not know what happened. That sort of
  thing, said the judge, must seriously impair the efficiency of the
  troops when sent to the Front.

                              _Record of Bristol Assizes, Autumn 1914_

  Two boys, 15 and 17, were fined for being drunk in munition works.
  One was discovered just in time to save him from carrying molten
  liquid.

                            _Birmingham Munitions Tribunal, Dec. 1916_

  “A boy joined the Royal Navy as a carpenter, living in barracks and
  working on shore. Every day he was given ‘grog’ for his rations,
  although he never asked for it and never took it.”

                                       _Facts in letter to the Author_

Such are the tragedies of boys handed over in our camps to drink and its
temptations. What of the girls in our munition shops? They have learned
to drink in thousands since the war began—respectable girls leaving home
to go into munitions, respectable young wives alone at home. With no
restraining hand upon them, with new companionships and pocket-money
flowing freely, it is not surprising the temptation should be too strong
for them. We can take only one or two cases.

  The girl-wife of a Cardiff seaman died in the street from exposure
  after drinking in publichouses with other girls.

                    _Records of Pontypridd Coroner, December 27, 1916_

  A publican at Lincoln was fined £5 for allowing children to be drunk
  on his premises. Ruth Onyon, 14, and Rose Herrick, 16, were found in
  his house with a soldier. They had been in five houses and had ten
  drinks each and reached home helplessly drunk.

                 _Facts in “Sheffield Daily Telegraph,” Sept. 1, 1916_

  A number of cartridge workers were summoned for taking drink into a
  munition works. One young woman was led to the surgery drunk at
  half-past four in the morning; another was discharged because she
  could not stand. Sixteen girls subscribed for four bottles of wine
  and whisky.

                 _Records of Leeds Munitions Tribunal, April 28, 1916_

  Two girls of 16 and 17 were fined for being helplessly drunk in an
  explosive works, the magistrates pointing out that their conduct
  imperilled the lives of other workers.

                _Records of Coventry Munitions Tribunal July 24, 1916_

  The men and girls at a large armament works drank all night. Girls
  would lurch into the dormitory dead drunk at 2 a. m.; one lady was
  up till 4 a. m. letting in drunken girls. As a result of drunkenness
  there was an explosion at these works, two men being killed and six
  injured.

                                 _Facts in “Spectator,” Jan. 20, 1917_

  A Dublin publichouse was found full of girls and soldiers, all
  drunk. Three drunken girls were taken away by six soldiers.

                              _Facts in “Irish Times,” April 20, 1916_

  In half an hour 367 girls entered Birmingham publichouses, scores
  under 18. Stout and beer were chiefly drunk, but whisky and water
  also, and some port wine. Ten young girls were quite drunk.

                                    _Facts in “Birmingham Daily Post”_

               Will some Member of Parliament please ask,

=in view of the fact that American soldiers are not to touch alcohol,
what arrangements the Government proposes to make for them in this
country?=

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          Back to the Homeland


Everywhere we hope and pray for peace, for the day when the men will
come home; but we may dread the day if the men come home to drink and
its temptations. The sudden release of millions of men, the certain
reaction after the terrible stress of these three years, is fearful to
contemplate with the door of the tap-room open. There would be an end of
civilization itself for days and weeks and months, and for many a town
at home the Peace would be worse than the War.

We owe it to these men to listen to the warning of the Prison
Commissioners who printed these words in their report last year:

=When war is succeeded by peace there will come a time of trial for
those who have never turned their backs to a bodily enemy. With the
passing of military discipline our brave fellows will be tempted to
forget the hardships and miseries of the trenches in a burst of
uncontrolled pleasure and license, and, if trade be bad and work
difficult to obtain, the lapse may, if not checked, become a step on a
downward career.=

It is not imagination merely. Judges, coroners, police, and all who face
the crime and misery of life, know well the bitter things that happen
when men come home without restraint. There are witnesses innumerable.
Let us hear a few of them.

  A captain in the Royal Flying Corps drove a motor-car through
  London, knocked a man down, drove on, and ignored the police, who
  eventually mounted the footboard and found the officer drunk.

                             _Bow Street Police Records, June 3, 1916_

  A lance-corporal on Chesterfield station was so drunk that he walked
  off the platform and fell on the line as a passenger train came up.

                           _Chesterfield Police Records, June 2, 1915_

  A corporal of the Duke of Cornwall’s Light Infantry, leaving the
  Front with 150 rounds of ammunition and his service rifle, came out
  drunk into the streets of West Ham and began firing his rifle.

                           _Facts in “Daily Chronicle,” July 10, 1915_

  A soldier who had received a cartridge from his son at the Front,
  put it in his rifle, and while drunk fired it in the streets of
  Manchester.

                         _Manchester Police Records, January 27, 1915_

  In the early hours of the morning two unarmed soldiers were fired at
  in Woolwich by a drunken soldier, who chased them for a long
  distance, firing shots all the time, until he was arrested.

                            _Facts in “Alliance News,” February, 1915_

  Drunkenness among soldiers and sailors is appalling. Unoffending
  travellers are delayed by drunken sentries. Sailors landing after
  weeks of arduous toil in the North Sea find it easy to get so drunk
  that some are drowned, some die from exposure, and many return to
  their ships in a condition of helpless inebriety.

                              _Facts in “Inverness Courier,” May 1915_

  Two drunken soldiers entered the parish church at Codford, set fire
  to the vestry, threw down the altar cross and candlestick, broke a
  stained-glass window, and tore leaves out of a Bible 200 years old.

                           _Facts in “Daily Chronicle,” April 3, 1916_

  A drunken soldier at Cannock was imprisoned for drawing his bayonet
  in the streets. “If I meet a policeman I will murder the dog,” he
  said, and, meeting one, he threatened to cut off his head.

                               _Police Records at Cannock, March 1916_

  400 soldiers tried to get a drunken man from the police in Grantham.

                              _Facts in “Grimsby News,” July 30, 1915_

  A drunken sergeant was found forcibly detaining a girl at Hornsey.
  On the police interfering, the drunken soldier drew his bayonet.

                            _Facts in “Daily News,” September 7, 1916_

  Three splendid-looking fellows, minesweepers, were traveling on the
  Highland Railway. “All were married men,” said a fellow passenger,
  “happy and proud of their homes, and they spoke with ache still in
  their hearts something of their lives and work. Well, these men
  succumbed during the journey. A change of trains was their
  opportunity, and I left them in a nearly helpless condition.”

                             _Facts in “The Spectator,” April 8, 1916_

  A lady visited a soldier’s wife and found her at home with all her
  clothes in pawn. Her husband and brother had both been home from the
  Front, and in one week had spent £8 on drink.

                     _Facts in the “Cork Constitution,” Dec. 10, 1915_

  A labourer, home from tunnelling work at the Front, was fined 13_s._
  for drunkenness on his 33rd appearance, having spent £45 in seven
  days.

                                _Facts in “Daily News,” Oct. 11, 1916_

  A disabled soldier was selling papers in Kingsway, London. He was
  proud of his military record and the character his colonel gave him.
  He was trying to compound for a pension; he thought he would settle
  for £50. “Mind you,” said he “there is not a better character in
  London than mine, and I shall get the £50. Then I shall have a
  month’s booze.” “What, with that fine character of yours?” a
  gentleman said to him. “Yes,” said the man, “when I came home, and
  could leave the hospital, there was £50 due to me, and I had a
  regular booze.”

                                           _Facts known to the Author_

  A soldier with twelve years’ clean record in the Army was sentenced
  for felony after being made drunk by his friends.

                        _Police Records of Southport, January 9, 1915_

No Government has ever received more warnings than the three war
Governments have received concerning drink. There is no room for them
here, but we may call a few witnesses such as cannot be ignored by a
nation looking forward to the day when millions of men will be home
again.

  A house in Westminster reeked with filth and drink and drunken
  overseas soldiers, “and it would be better,” said the Crown
  Solicitor, “if power were given to the police to sweep such places
  off the earth.”

                               _Westminster Police Records, Aug. 1916_

  A sapper seaman was found dead at the quay. Another seaman said his
  friend had seven drinks. They left the publichouse arm-in-arm, and
  went to the quay. There he saw a corporal, who was boatswain for the
  night, and was drunk. Leaving the sapper, he got the corporal into
  the boat, and went back for his friend, but the sapper had
  disappeared.

  The lieutenant: “The deceased was one of the quietest boys who had
  ever been on the ship, and one of the best oarsmen. The whole
  trouble was that it was pay day.”

  The Coroner: “Prohibition during the war would be a blessing to all.
  It seems to be a very rotten state of affairs.”

  The foreman: “Drink.”

  The lieutenant: “Prohibition would be the best thing.”

  The Coroner: “This poor man, unfortunately, is one of many.”

                   _Facts in “Western Daily Mercury,” January 8, 1917_

  A publican at Dover was fined £20 for selling a bottle of whisky to
  a sailor. The Admiral said drink undermined the efficiency of the
  patrol vessels, and those who supplied it directly assisted the
  enemy, and might be the cause of the loss of very many lives.

                            _Police Records of Dover, October 6, 1916_

  A private in the Northumberland Fusiliers, aged 23, was charged with
  burglary while drunk. His father and three brothers were in the
  Army. He took part in the battle of Loos, was wounded at Salonika,
  and was recommended for distinction for helping to save a wounded
  officer.

  During the whole of Christmas leave he was drinking, made drunk by
  his friends who were probably proud of his having held part of a
  trench against a German bombing party. His captain described him as
  a good soldier in peace, and brave in action—a man whose disgrace
  would be felt by the regiment.

  Mr. Justice Rowlatt said everyone was hoping for the time when
  millions of brave men would come home after facing incredible
  dangers, and we must look forward almost with terror to having these
  men exposed to drink and its temptations. What would be the state of
  the country in such a case unless we could make a clean sweep of
  drink? We should have to face this question over and over again, and
  the sooner we faced it the better.

                        _Records of Derbyshire Assizes, February 1917_

  Whoever allowed soldiers or sailors to drink to excess, said the
  Mayor of Tynemouth, should be tried by court-martial for treason. He
  would be recreant in his duty to God, to himself, and to the
  citizens, if he did not call attention to the brutalising of so many
  townspeople and the callous conduct of the “waster” element in the
  drink trade. He had no quarrel with those who conducted their
  business properly.

                           _Facts in Tynemouth papers, February, 1915_

  The Aldershot command appealed for the closing of half the
  publichouses, to save the men from temptation when the troops are
  demobilised and return with their pockets full of money.

                       _Record of Workingham Licensing Sessions, 1917_

  The _Army and Navy Gazette_, in an article disapproving of the
  Prohibition Campaign, issues a terrible warning which should be
  printed on the door of the room in which the Army Council meets.
  These are its words:

  “It is on record that towards the end of the siege of Sebastopol rum
  was made too regular an issue, with the result that almost every
  soldier who survived to return home became a drunkard.”

The siege of Sebastopol lasted less than a year, and that is the work of
the rum issue for a few months. If rum does that in months, what will it
do in years?

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          Into the Firing Line


Lord Kitchener is dead, but there are two things that are with us
still—that rare little note that he gave to his men as they went out,
warning them of drink; and that infamous note sent out by a drink firm
in London, begging our people to send out drink to our men. They can
guarantee it right up to the firing line, they say, and even when our
shells could not get there through drink, drink seems to have found its
way. It can get on to transports when the Ministry of Munitions is
waiting urgently for shipping space; it can commandeer our vans and
horses and trains when these mean life or death to us; it seems to get
past any regulation; it goes about with the power of a king, doing its
work where it will.

  It is regrettable that our troops at the Front cannot get more
  British Beer.

                          Managing Director of Allsopps, July 14, 1916

  Dear Sir, In answer to your inquiry, the only limitation in the size
  of cases consigned to officers in the Expeditionary Force is that
  they must not exceed 1 cwt.

  We can guarantee delivery right into the front trenches. The cases
  are handed over at Southampton to the Military Forwarding Officer,
  and the A.S.C. see them right through. We are shipping hundreds of
  cases weekly. Yours faithfully,

                        _Letter from a Wine and Spirit firm in London_

So drink finds its way to the front, to weaken our troops, with all
their matchless heroism. Let us call the witnesses who have seen the
work it does.

  Soldiers at the front, tried for drunkenness, have declared that
  they have received drink from home. Men sometimes receive flasks in
  the trenches. They are exhausted, the stimulant revives them for a
  minute or two, and the harm is done. “And then (says Col. Crozier)
  they get about two years’ hard labour.”

      _Letter from Colonel Crozier, commanding 9th Royal Irish Rifles_

  As a result of a Court-martial investigating charges of excessive
  drinking among the officers of a regiment at the Front, the Army
  Council removed the commanding officer from his post.

                                     _Records of Court-martials, 1916_

  In the torrid climate of Mesopotamia, in defiance of all military
  medical history, rum was issued to the men instead of food and
  sterile water, and the presence of cholera, dysentery and other
  diseases, was attributed to this by Sir Victor Horsley. “Our gross
  failures and stupidity,” he said, “are in my opinion due to whisky
  affecting the intellectual organs and clearness of our leaders. They
  do not realise that alcohol in small doses acts as a brake on the
  brain.”

             _Facts in a letter from Sir Victor Horsley, May 13, 1916_

[Illustration: THE JUNKER’S LITTLE BROTHER]

  Battalion Headquarters—colonel and chaplain present. Enter Adjutant:
  “The rum ration is due tonight, sir; am I to distribute it?” The
  colonel (nobly and in a voice audible all over the trench): “No!
  Damn the rum! To hell with the rum!”

                     _Chaplain’s letter in “Alliance News,” June 1916_

  At a court-martial in Newcastle, a sergeant-major, charged with
  misappropriating funds of the sergeant’s mess, pleaded that during
  this period a resolution of the mess had come into effect, providing
  free drinks during Christmas and the New Year.

                               _Facts in “Daily News,” April 17, 1916_

  “In the Flying Services one has seen more than one good man go to
  the dogs through drink, or become fat and flabby and useless through
  just the excess of alcohol which falls short of taking to drink in
  the usual acceptance of the term. More men take to drink because of
  the ‘have another’ custom than because they like or need alcohol,
  and simple Prohibition would stop all this nonsense straight away.
  This kindly note is not the outpouring of a teetotal fanatic, for I
  suppose I have paid in my time rather more than my share of the
  nation’s drink-bill; it is merely a perfectly sound argument in
  favour of increasing the nation’s efficiency at the expense of its
  chief bad habit.”

                                       _The Editor of “The Aeroplane”_

  A lieutenant in the trenches, knowing that the rum ration made him
  cold, threw his rum on the ground. His captain saw him, and
  threatened to report him. “You do, sir,” said the lieutenant, “and I
  will report you for being drunk on duty.”

                                   _Facts in possession of the Author_

  A seaman serving on a ship in Cork Harbour died from alcohol. Found
  drunk and unknown, he was put on a stretcher and died.

                      _Facts in “Cork Constitution,” December 9, 1915_

  “Over three-quarters of the court-martials I have had anything to do
  with are due directly or indirectly to drunkenness. Many thousands
  of competent N.C.O.s and soldiers have been punished, and become
  useless to the nation during their punishment, as a result of drink.

  “I have never been a teetotaler, and have rather opposed the radical
  temperance agitation, but am now changing my views as I see our
  success over here hampered and our progress towards victory retarded
  so obviously by drink.”

       _Letter from a Lieut.-Colonel at the Front, seen by the Author_

  The captain of a British merchant ship, drunk on the bridge, ordered
  his chief gunner to fire 50 rounds of shell at nothing. The gunner
  fired four rounds to appease him. Going through the Mediterranean,
  the drunken captain ordered his gunner to fire at a British hospital
  ship, and the incident led to a struggle for life, which ended in
  the captain’s being put in irons, tried, and sentenced to five
  years’ penal servitude.

                   _Record of Devon Assizes, Exeter, February 2, 1917_

  An officer was left in charge of a British ship. Mad with drink, he
  went among the men and shot one dead. He is now in an asylum.

                                      _Case reported to the Admiralty_

  The crew of a Dutch ship arriving in the Tyne was placed under a
  naval guard after a drunken riot in which three were killed.

                           _Facts in “Daily News,” September 14, 1915_

  The captain of a Norwegian barque mysteriously disappeared, and the
  vessel arrived in port from the North Sea. The mate, who had been
  drinking heavily, was seen, with a hammer in his hand, with the
  captain in a corner, bleeding from wounds about the head.

                                _Facts in “Daily News,” April 8, 1916_

  A seaman ashore in Glasgow, “wild with drink and passion,” was
  terribly wounded in a quarrel in a public-house, and died the same
  night. A youth of 19 was sentenced to five years’ penal servitude.

                          _Records of Edinburgh High Court, Dec. 1916_

  A barge-loader at West India Docks died from alcohol, and three
  other men were removed in an ambulance after drinking rum.

                             _Facts in “Daily Chronicle,” May 9, 1916_

  Orders were given on a steamer for the boats to be swung out in
  readiness for submarines. The first and second officer, having been
  drinking, could not do their duty.

                   _Records of Liverpool Marine Board, April 13, 1917_

  The jury returned a verdict of murder against a youth of 19 who,
  after drinking one night, went on to his ship and killed the second
  officer.

                             _Records of Hull Coroner, April 24, 1917_

  A drunken captain in command of a drifter landed with an armed party
  on the Isle of Man. He posted the men on the quay, and gave them
  orders to allow no one to pass. Declaring he would shoot every
  person who came within reach, he fired twice, and threatened to kill
  two police officers.

                                   _Facts in “Times,” October 6, 1916_

Such is the work of drink wherever it finds a soldier to entrap—the
drink the Navy carries free from Southampton to the trenches; and from
America comes the news, as this page is being written, that the Army and
the Navy of our Western Ally, like the Army and the Navy of our Eastern
Ally, are to be under Total Prohibition.

               Will some Member of Parliament please ask

=how much bread is destroyed each week to make beer for German
internment camps in this country?=

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                        Drink and the Red Cross


If the full story could ever be told of the national tragedy of drink
and the war there would be no more ghastly chapter than that which would
tell how drink fought the Red Cross; how, without pity, it hindered the
work of mercy that is the general consolation of the world in days like
these.

We are coming to a famine not only in food, but in doctors. The
death-roll has been heavy beyond all parallel; the strain on the medical
services has been almost too great to be borne, and we look anxiously
round to know where the doctors and nurses will come from. With
Prohibition the problem would be largely solved, for the ordinary burden
of life would be largely lifted from our doctors and hospitals, and
thousands of men and women would be free to give themselves to the war
instead of mending up and patching up the sordid effects of drink. A
rich brewer gave a donation for extending a hospital. “Ah! but we should
not have to extend if he would shut up his public-houses,” said a
doctor.

It is easy to see how drink is telling all the time against our doctors,
our nurses, and our hospitals everywhere. Let us call a few witnesses.

  Somebody gave a glass of neat whisky to two wounded men at a garden
  party in Tottenham. Both were drunk when the brake came to take them
  home, and one died on the way.

                   _Facts in “Sheffield Telegraph,” September 3, 1915_

  Three wounded soldiers at Oxford were overcome by four bottles of
  rum smuggled into the hospital by visitors, and one of the men died.

                             _Records of Oxford Coroner, January 1916_

  A wounded soldier asked for two hours’ leave, came back in four
  hours drunk with whisky, and died after a terrible night in the
  hospital.

                                               _Facts in “Daily Mail”_

  Two limbless soldiers were found helplessly drunk on the pavement at
  Brighton. A publican was fined £20.

                       _Facts in “Daily Chronicle,” November 25, 1916_

  A wounded soldier, mentioned in despatches, was charged with causing
  the death of a soldier with whom he had been drinking. Reeling under
  a heavy blow, the injured man was helped to bed, but when the bugle
  sounded in the morning he was dead.

                            _Facts in “Daily Mail,” December 21, 1915_

  A soldier, aged 29, with a gunshot wound in his arm, died from
  alcohol at Oxford. One Sunday night he and two other wounded
  soldiers consumed four bottles of rum brought into the hospital.

                         _Records of Oxford Coroner, January 10, 1916_

  Three soldiers in hospital uniform were found lying helplessly drunk
  on the tramlines of Sheffield. Two were back from the Dardanelles.

                            _Facts in “Sheffield Star,” March 2, 1916_

  Seamen on a ship bringing wounded to England from Boulogne were so
  drunk that they interfered with the stretcher bearers, and one fell
  across a wounded soldier lying on deck.

                         _Police Records of Southampton, May 14, 1915_

  There was a paralysed and helpless man who was found hopelessly
  drunk in hospital after his friends had visited him.

                    _Statement by Lieut.-Col. Sir Alfred Pearce Gould_

  An officer who has trained hundreds of men for the ambulance corps
  declared that a large percentage of wounded are in a very nervous
  condition, in which alcohol means collapse and almost certain death.

                                              _Quoted in “Daily Mail”_

  Lying helpless at a London station, moaning on the ground in drunken
  delirium, was a lad in hospital blue who had, in truth, been wounded
  by his friends. Drink was taking him again through the worst of his
  experiences, and his mental pain was pitiable to see.

                                 _Facts in the “Globe,” January, 1917_

  Two drunken soldiers from Gallipoli made what a doctor described as
  the most savage attack he ever saw on a civilian. They held a young
  man’s head against a wall and pounded him unmercifully.

                              _Facts in “Daily News,” August 19, 1916_

  A party of soldiers were seriously injured in a struggle to arrest a
  drunken private at Pontefract. The publican called on the men in his
  taproom to rescue the private, but the sergeants drove them off.

                              _Facts in “Daily News,” October 5, 1914_

  A sergeant of a Welsh regiment, invited to drink by friends in
  Waterloo Road, was picked up as he lay senseless, his pulse beating
  feebly, his eyes wide open, and his body starving with cold.

                            _Facts in “Daily News,” February 14, 1916_

  A drunken man rushed from a publichouse and kicked a soldier
  unconscious. The military police, chasing the man, were stoned. Four
  soldiers were injured, one having his head cut open, and the
  military were ordered to clear the place with fixed bayonets.

                              _Facts in “Daily News,” August 11, 1915_

  The medical officer in charge of the Mental Block of a large
  military hospital said to the Colonel: “I have the worst job of all,
  and it is through Drink, Drink, Drink! Men recover fairly soon from
  shell shock, but officers, especially the younger ones, who
  habitually take wines and spirits, are subject to relapses every few
  days. It is awful!”

                  _Facts in “National Temperance Quarterly,” May 1917_

  Of the thirty war hospitals in Hertfordshire, with 8000 men passing
  through them in the first thirty months of the war, there is not one
  that has not had trouble with drink.

                                           _Facts known to the Author_

  A doctor from a Canadian hospital said a large percentage of their
  troops had had to be sent back to Canada rendered permanently insane
  through the action of alcohol.

                             _Facts in “Daily News,” October 31, 1916_

One terrible truth remains to be told of the crime of drink against the
Red Cross. The most blessed thing in all the world today is alcohol, for
it makes chloroform and ether, which soothe the pain of men. We cannot
get enough of either of these consoling drugs, yet we go on wasting
precious food to make more alcohol _to add to the sum of misery and
pain_.

               Will some Member of Parliament please ask

=whether the bread ration applies equally to all; or if it may be
exceeded if the excess is drunk instead of being eaten?=

                                  and

=how many brewers’ vats have been imported this year on ships which had
no room for urgent munitions of war?=

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                     Stabbing the Army in the Back


All the world is learning now that the drink trade is the great
confederate of venereal disease. It leads a man into temptation,
destroys his power of resistance, and retards his chances of recovery.

We can never know the truth about the extent of this disease, about the
way in which the liquor trade, by breaking down tens of thousands of our
men, has stabbed the Army in the back. But the number of soldiers
incapacitated by this disease through drink is enormously greater than
the number incapacitated by the most subtle or dramatic stroke devised
by the German staff.

The lost man-power of the Army through this disease must be equal to the
whole of the original British Expeditionary Force. The Government has
given us figures for the Army at home last year, and they are 43 per
1,000—or over 100,000 cases for an army of 2,500,000 men. There were
7,000 cases in one Canadian camp alone.

Here are the black facts revealed in a debate in Parliament on April 23,
1917, when two distinguished Army officers, speaking with great
restraint, sought to open the eyes of the nation to this plague fostered
in our camps by drink:

  “During the war we have had admitted into the hospitals of England
  over 70,000 cases of gonorrhœa, over 20,000 cases of syphilis, and
  over 6000 cases of another disease somewhat similar. I am quite
  openly prepared to state that of these 20,000 cases of syphilis you
  do not get much work out of them under two and a half years. I know
  from what I have seen of the modern conditions of this War that you
  may absolutely wipe them out, except for a few handfuls.

  “When you come to the great mass of casualties under this head ...
  the figures mean that you have =a Division constantly out of
  action=. If you have anything like 70,000 men enfeebled, you find
  that you suffer to that extent also. It is not only that you lose
  the men, and not only the men who are partially cured are suffering
  for many months to come, but their chances of recovery from wounds
  are not nearly so good.

  “I know of a hospital for venereal cases which it was found
  necessary to expand from its normal accommodation for 500 or 600 up
  to 2,000 cases, and they are continually full. It is a British
  hospital in France. A figure I should like to submit to challenge is
  that during the course of the war between 40,000 and 50,000 cases of
  syphilis have passed through our hospitals in France. When you come
  to gonorrhœa, the figure given me which covers that is between
  150,000 and 200,000 cases.”

                         _Captain Guest in Parliament, April 23, 1917_

  “Every Canadian soldier who comes to this country arrives here not
  only a first-class specimen of a fine soldier, but as clean-limbed
  and as clean a man as the Creator Himself could create. The fact
  that in one only of the three Canadian camps in this country 7,000
  of these clean Canadian boys went through the hospital for venereal
  disease in fourteen months is not only a great discredit to any
  Government in this country but has an effect in Canada which I can
  assure the House does not make for a better feeling with the Home
  Country, and does not make for what we all desire—Imperial Unity.”

           _Colonel Sir Hamar Greenwood in Parliament, April 23, 1917_

Those are unchallenged statements made in the House of Commons itself;
they stand as a terrible indictment of this disease, and it is not to be
denied that this evil could never have reached its present frightful
proportions if Parliament had followed the King. Let us look at a few
examples of the ravages of this vice allied so closely to the
public-house.

  It is not possible to tell the whole truth about drink; the language
  in which it must be written would be offensive in a civilised
  country. It must be said, simply, that soldiers in England have been
  court-martialled for having been influenced by drink to commit
  unspeakable offences against animals.

                                  _Facts in Records of Court-Martials_

  A special constable in a harlot-haunted district in London describes
  how these harpies carry off lonely soldiers to their rooms, make
  them drunk, and finally innoculate them, as likely as not, with
  disease. Is it not possible to hold in check these women who prey
  upon and poison our soldiers? asks Sir Conan Doyle.

                                               _Letter in the “Times”_

  One of the hot-beds of venereal disease to which drink leads our
  soldiers, was kept by an Austrian woman in Lambeth, who was
  receiving 15_s._ a week from the Austrian Government in April 1916,
  and used to lure our soldiers when weakened by drink. All the men
  seen to enter this house were either soldiers or sailors.

                                           _Police Records of Lambeth_

  A soldier from the Front with £18 was taken by a married woman to
  her home, where he was found after a drunken bout with eight women,
  all drunk. The woman’s children were terribly neglected.

                     _Police Records of St. Helens, November 30, 1915_

  If you describe the Waterloo Road and the back streets as an open
  sewer you will be somewhere near the truth. Not a day goes by
  without bringing some soldier who has been waylaid.

                             _Facts in the “Times,” February 22, 1917_

  A soldier came from the Front to go home to Scotland. He got drunk
  near Waterloo, losing all his money and his railway pass. He spent
  his leave living on charity, and returned to the Front without
  having been near either his home or his friends.

                            _Facts in “Daily News,” February 14, 1916_

Here is the official proof of the relation of the drink trade to this
traffic in disease. It is from the Report of the Royal Commission:

  Abundant evidence was given as to the intimate relation between
  alcohol and venereal diseases.

  Alcohol renders a man liable to yield to temptations which he might
  otherwise resist, and aggravates the disease by diminishing the
  resistance of the individual.

  Alcoholism makes latent syphilis and gonorrhœa active.

  Our evidence tends to show that the communication in disease is
  frequently due to indulgence in intoxicants, and there is no doubt
  that the growth of temperance among the population would help to
  bring about an amelioration of the very serious conditions which our
  enquiry has revealed.

  We desire, therefore, to place on record our opinion that action
  should be taken without delay.

               Will some Member of Parliament please ask

=if, in view of Lord D’Abernon’s statement that Prohibition has failed
in Canada, the Government will issue the figures showing the decrease of
crime and the increase of wealth?=

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                       The Price the Empire Pays


It is a bitter irony that while the men of the Empire have come to
France to fight the enemy of mankind, this foe within our gates has
struck a blow at the British Empire that generations will not heal. How
many Empire men this private trade has slain we do not know, but we know
beyond all challenge that it has weakened the bonds that bind our
Dominions to the Motherland. This trade that throttles us at home can
pull the Empire down, and it has started well. It has struck its blow at
Canada.

Let us look at the plain facts which in other days than these would have
caused a storm of anger that Parliament could not have ignored. Canada
has followed the King; arming herself with her full powers, flinging
herself upon her enemies with her utmost strength, she has swept drink
out of Canada almost from sea to sea. But even before she did this
Canada saw that alcohol must go from her camps if her men were to be fit
to fight for England, and long before the Prohibition wave swept across
the country, the Canadian Government removed all alcohol from the
training camps. It was the deliberate choice of a Government and its
people, and from that day to this there has been no reason for regret.

So the young manhood of Canada, rallying to the flag, was guarded from
alcohol. She poured out her men in hundreds of thousands; they came to
us from Prohibition camps; they came in Prohibition ships, and even here
this trade that has us in its grip was not allowed at first in the
Canadian camps; the only condition that Canada made—a condition implied
but clearly understood—was properly regarded and obeyed.

We respected the desire of Canada, and kept her soldiers free from drink
in their own camps. But a soldier cannot keep in camp, and in the
villages around the Drink Trade waits in every street. The military
authorities were willing for the Canadian Government to have their way
inside the camps, but drink was free outside, and in these public-houses
there was sown the seed that may one day break this Empire. The Drink
Trade was so rampant outside the Canadian camps that Prohibition inside
was almost in vain. We had to decide between breaking the word of the
Canadian Government to its people or dealing with this trade as Canada
herself has done; as Russia has done; as France and America are doing.
It was the Empire or the drink traffic, and the drink traffic won, as it
always wins with us.

It came about in October, down on Salisbury Plain. During one week-end a
number of Canadian troops gave way to drinking in villages around the
camps, and it was then that the grave decision was come to that the
drink trade should be allowed to set up its horrible canteens in every
Canadian camp. The change was made at the request of a British General,
and we have the assurance of the Prime Minister of Canada that the
approval of the Canadian Government was neither obtained nor asked. In
handing the Canadian Army over to the drink canteens, in deliberately
reversing the policy of the Canadian Government and its people, there
was no consultation with Canada.

It is important to remember that this decision, fraught with tragic and
far-reaching consequences for the Empire, was a pure and simple English
act. We may imagine the Canadian view from the remark of a Canadian
General, who said, “I know drink is a hindrance, but I can do very
little, because in military circles in this country drunkenness is not
considered a very serious offense.”

It would have been surprising if there had not poured in upon our
Government a stream of protests, and from all parts of the Dominions
they came. The Dominion of Canada, giving freely to the Motherland
450,000 boys and men, was moved to passionate indignation that England
should scorn her love for them, should ignore the pleadings of their
mothers and sisters, and should put in their way the temptations from
which they were saved at home. Canada does not want our drink trade; she
lives side by side with the United States, she sees that great country
building up its future free from drink, and she sees America, splendid
ally in war, as a mighty rival in peace.

And Canada is ready for the Reconstruction. She has followed the
Prohibition lead of the United States, and already she has ceased to be
a borrowing country. The very first year of Prohibition has seen this
young Dominion, for the first time in her history, financially
self-sustaining. Crime is disappearing; social gatherings are held in
her gaols; she has set up vast munition workshops, and instead of
borrowing money for her own support she has made hundreds of millions’
worth of munitions for which this country need not pay until the war is
over, and then need never pay at all for the munitions the Canadians
have used. Canada is in deadly earliest. She kept her men away from
drink to make them fit; she has swept it away to make a clean country
for those who go back.

And what is England’s contribution to this Imperial Reconstruction? _We
have scorned it all._ The Prime Minister has said that this drink trade
is so horrible that it is worth this horrible war to settle with it, yet
we have sacrificed the love of Canada on our brewers’ altar. We can
believe the Canadian who declares his profound conviction that but for
this Canada would have sent us 100,000 more recruits; we can believe it
is true that where responsible Canadians meet together in these days the
talk is of how long the tie will last unbroken that binds the daughter
to the Motherland. We can understand the passion that lies behind the
resolutions that come to Downing Street from Nova Scotia; we know the
depth of the yearning of those 64,000 mothers and wives of Toronto who
signed that great petition to the Government of Canada begging it in the
name of God to intervene.

We can understand it all; but let us call the witnesses, and let us see
the price the Dominion pays for our quailing before this Kaiser’s trade.


                       Those Who Will Not Go Back

It is the great consolation of Canada that, though their sons may fall
before this tempter’s trade in Britain, they will go back to a Canada
free from drink. But some will never go back, and they are not on the
Roll of Honour. They have been destroyed by the enemy within our gate,
this trade that traps men on their way to France and digs their graves.

  A young Canadian who had never tasted alcohol came from a
  Prohibition camp in Canada, came to England on a Prohibition ship,
  and was put in a camp with a drink canteen. He started drinking and
  contracted venereal disease. Ordered home as unfit, in fear and
  shame he sought a friend’s advice about the girl he was to marry.
  “You can never marry her,” said his friend, and that night in his
  hut the young Canadian blew out his brains.

                                   _Facts in possession of the Author_

  A young Canadian officer was sent home disgraced. Sodden with
  alcohol, he left the train and shot a railway clerk dead.

                _Facts in Montreal “Weekly Witness,” October 24, 1916_

  A Russian soldier in the Canadian forces, described as a clean,
  soldierly man, with a splendid character from his officer, was
  charged with the murder of a Canadian private who tried to separate
  two quarrelling soldiers in a bar. The prisoner had drunk much
  whisky and remembered nothing of his crime, and was sentenced to
  twelve months’ hard labour for manslaughter. The judge hoped he
  might be used as a soldier _in the Russian Army_.

                          _Record of Hampshire Assizes, February 1916_

  A man from Prohibition Russia enlisted in Prohibition Canada, and
  came to England. He spent 9_s._ on drink one day, and that night he
  crept from his bed and killed his corporal at Witley Camp.

                          _Police Records of Godalming, February 1917_

  A Canadian soldier, aged 26, after a publichouse quarrel with
  another soldier, was found dying on the pavement in Hastings. His
  throat had been cut, and he died on entering the hospital. The other
  soldier was charged with murder, and sentenced to 15 years.

                              _Record of Hastings Assizes, March 1917_

  A young Canadian soldier, aged 20, died from alcohol while in
  training at Witley. He had a bottle of stout followed by nine or ten
  “double-headers” of neat whisky in about two hours. He was carried
  back to camp, laid unconscious on his bed, and died.

                          _Facts in “Daily Chronicle,” March 22, 1917_

  A Canadian lieutenant was tried for the murder of a canteen
  sergeant. They arrived together at a house at Grayshott, where the
  lieutenant asked for some strong drink and took a bottle of whisky
  and two glasses. The sergeant was afterwards found dead in the
  cellar, and the lieutenant carried the body into the stable.

                         _Records of Grayshott Coroner, December 1915_

  A man leaving a publichouse in company with a woman, with whom he
  had been drinking, met a Canadian soldier not far from Charing
  Cross. The soldier spoke, and the man struck him. The soldier was
  carried to the hospital, where he died soon afterwards from a wound
  two inches deep, caused by a knife.

                       _Police Records of Bow Street, January 1, 1917_

  The wife of a gunner in the South African Heavy Artillery died at
  Bexhill from alcohol. The soldier said he bought 12 bottles of stout
  and 12 bottles of beer, one of whisky, and one of port, which they
  drank between Saturday night and Monday night.

                           _Records of Bexhill Coroner, December 1915_

  A soldier from Toronto, having been drinking away his pay in a
  Carlisle publichouse, with another Canadian soldier and some married
  women, failed to appear the next morning, and was found dead on a
  footpath with a bottle of whisky in his pocket

                         _Records of Carlisle Coroner, April 14, 1917_

  A Canadian soldier, having drawn £20 from the Canadian office,
  visited several publichouses, and was killed in a scuffle in London.

                             _Facts in “Daily News,” December 2, 1916_


                   The Men From the Prohibition Camps

Again and again we have seen the peculiar temptations of drink among
Canadians. Officers, chief-constables, chaplains, newspapers, the men
themselves, have all borne witness that to these men from Prohibition
Canada the sudden temptations of our drink trade come with terrible
power, and often they fall not knowing. The finest manhood of the Empire
our tap-rooms and canteens destroy, not in isolated cases, but in a host
we dare not number.

Of the soldiers who first came over from Canada, says a great Canadian
paper, many were emigrants from England, not yet securely planted in
Canada, and for their sakes especially drink should have been withheld
from them. Of the larger number of Canadian troops that followed them,
many were youths who had never known drink, and they were taken from
home at the most social and reckless age, to face drink with all the
temptations induced by the nervous strain, the hardships and social
abandon of the camp and the trench, and the free pocket-money when on
leave.

  In an officers’ mess of two double companies of Canadians only one
  officer drank on his arrival in a canteen camp in England; within
  three months there was not an abstainer in the mess.

         _Facts told at Society for Study of Inebriety, Jan. 10, 1916_

  These men come mostly from districts in Canada where intoxicants are
  prohibited by law, and many of them, being young lads, who perhaps
  have never tasted liquor before their arrival, fall easy victims.

                                        _Chief Constable of Godalming_

  Overseas soldiers come to our hospitals astonishingly cheerful and
  fit in a general sense, and wonderfully receptive to treatment. Only
  three per thousand die in our great hospitals. This is largely due
  to the hardy life of the men and the fact that they are removed from
  the danger of taking too much alcohol. The home troops have a much
  higher mortality, partly because their use of alcohol diminishes
  their chances. Re-admissions are largely due to drink on furlough.

          _Major Maclean, M.D., of the Third Western General Hospital_

  A Canadian soldier, who had been wounded at the Front, was taken to
  a house by women and left alone drunk. An officer gave him an
  excellent character, and said he was on his way back to Canada.
  These men experience temptations here (he said) that they would not
  find in Canada, and there was too much of this going on.

                          _Hastings Police Records, February 19, 1917_

  I heard a sad account of the havoc of the wet canteen and a private
  in a Canadian A.M.C. told us of a lad of 17 who is made so drunk
  that there is rarely a night when he has not to be helped up to bed.
  One of the soldiers here told me of his son in Canada being anxious
  to join up, but after seeing the condition of things over here he
  was doing all he could to discourage his son.

                                                _Letter to the Author_

  The Canadians in most cases are entirely lost when they arrive in
  this country, and are much more liable to the temptation which is
  thrown in their way, but when you give a figure such as this—that in
  one camp during last year, and two months of the previous year,
  there were 7,000 cases—it seems to me that it is about time we
  realised the magnitude of the evil. I do not know what has happened
  to them, except that I imagine a large number have gone back to
  Canada, and have not been able to play the part they had hoped to
  play.

                         _Captain Guest in Parliament, April 23, 1917_


                          In Camp and On Leave

Everywhere we find the trail of drink among Canadians—in camp and on
leave.

  A Canadian corporal, wounded in the Battle of Ypres, was found
  terribly drunk after being missing all day from hospital. Confronted
  with the surgeon after violent acts of insubordination, the corporal
  broke down and cried like a child.

                          _Facts in “Western Mail,” February 18, 1916_

  In the first weeks of the war 42 Canadian soldiers disgraced
  themselves, by excessive drinking, insubordination, and disorderly
  conduct, to such an extent that they had to be sent back to Canada.

                       _Facts in “Canadian Pioneer,” December 4, 1914_

  A Canadian soldier, helplessly drunk, was seen at King’s Cross
  station eating, tearing, and crumpling up £1 notes, and would have
  lost about fifteen pounds but for kindly help from passers by.

                      _Facts in “Daily Chronicle,” September 28, 1916_

  A gunner from Montreal, missing from camp for several days, drank
  himself delirious, and cut his throat with a razor.

                       _Facts in “Canadian Pioneer,” December 4, 1914_

  A Canadian soldier spent £70 in three weeks on drink and bad
  characters.

                               _Facts in “Daily Mail” August 10, 1915_

  A Sergeant-Major from Canada declared that he had lost 20 per cent.
  of the men of his battery through venereal disease. They had a
  little drink, and were captured by the swarm of bad women at
  Folkestone.

                                           _Facts in Letter to Author_

  A woman was imprisoned for placing young children in moral danger.
  Every night the girls brought soldiers home, and colonial soldiers
  were frequently so drunk that they were carried in.

                   _Records of Central Criminal Court, April 25, 1917_


                       The Rising Storm in Canada

  =The thing cannot be justified. It is the blackest tragedy of this
  whole war that, in fighting for freedom in Europe, the free sons of
  the British breed have to face this war-time record of waste at
  home, with its inevitable toll of debauchery and crime.=

                                        _Editorial in “Toronto Globe”_

While this book was being written one of the greatest meetings ever held
in Manchester was cheering a Canadian in khaki who declared that he was
not going hungry while brewers were destroying food, and he went on to
say, this soldier and sportsman well-known in the Dominion:

  “Great numbers of our men never saw France. Canadian boys cried
  because they had not munitions. England reeled and beer flowed like
  water while thousands of our boys went down into their graves. We
  will never forget it in Canada.”

We may be sure Canada will not forget. She will not forget her dead: she
will not forget that the Drink Traffic she has swept away at home struck
down her sons in the land for which they fought. “We must know who is to
blame,” says a Canadian paper; “we presume they will have no objection
to have their names placarded before the country, that every mother may
know.” Col. Sir Hamar Greenwood, M. P., has lately returned from Canada,
and this is what he tells us:

  “I met many fathers and mothers whose boys had been sent back to
  Canada debilitated and ruined for life because they had been
  enmeshed by harpies, and again and again these parents have said to
  me, ‘We do not mind our boys dying on the field of battle for old
  England, but to think that we sent our sons to England to come back
  to us ruined in health, and a disgrace to us, to them, and to the
  country, is something the Home Country should never ask us to
  bear.’”

  _Letter from a Solicitor in Ontario to the Author_:

  I wonder if the advocates of the drink traffic in Britain appreciate
  the contempt in which they are held in Canada. Before the war I had
  a class of ten young men. Every one of them is now at the Front, and
  one writes that when I told them of the drink conditions in England
  he did not believe half of it; now he says I did not tell him half.
  Letters from our Canadian soldiers are appearing in our papers, and
  they are all amazed at the drinking habits of Britain.

  _From a Resolution received by Mr. Lloyd George from the Social
  Service Council of Nova Scotia_:

  That we, representing the social, moral, and spiritual forces of
  this part of the British Empire, who have proved our loyalty by the
  thousands of men this small province has sent overseas, do record
  our most earnest protest against Britain’s inaction in this matter,
  which we are sure must result in longer and increased suffering for
  the men we have sent to help her win the war; and do most
  insistently plead with the British Government and the British
  Parliament that they at once exercise the power vested in them to
  strike the blow that will dispose of this enemy at home, and so give
  mighty reinforcement to those who are bleeding and dying for Britain
  and human liberties on the battlefields abroad.

  _Sermon by Dr. Flanders in London, Ontario, Feb. 25, 1917_:

  Canada has the right to make this demand on the Motherland from the
  simple standpoint of political economics. That we might put the
  Dominion into the best possible shape to give the utmost of our
  strength in men and munitions, we have an almost Dominion-wide
  Prohibition, and no intelligent person will deny that our
  contributions to the war from the first have been multiplied and
  intensified by that action. Why should little Johnnie Canuck abolish
  drink that he might conserve his manhood and material resources in
  the interest of the Empire’s war, and big John Bull refuse to
  abolish the traffic to the great waste of his material resources and
  the undoing of his efficiency?

  _A public man with three soldier sons wrote to the Toronto Globe_:

  Canada, for efficiency in war, casts out the drink evil. Is it too
  much to expect Britain, in fairness, to do the same? Is it not a
  mockery for the British Isles to face our common struggle with this
  palsy in her frame?

  Here is the bitter pill, the embittering thought for many a Canadian
  parent. Let me be a type. Three of my sons are in khaki. I gave them
  a father’s blessing when they enlisted. But this thought strains,
  most of all, the ties of my loyalty to the cause—to see my sons
  fight and fall for a Britain that at home is saddled by distillery
  interests, and misguided by a Press silent as the grave on this
  entrenched evil. Why should our sons go from a country where booze
  is banished to spend months on the way to the trenches in England,
  where the vices of the liquor traffic are legalised?

  _We see the spirit of Canada in those great words of the Premier of
  Ontario, Mr. Hearst, speaking of the giving up of drink_:

  In this day of national peril, in this day when the future of the
  British Empire, the freedom of the world, and the blessings of
  democratic government hang in the balance, if I should fail to
  listen to what I believe to be the call of duty, if I should neglect
  to take every action that in my judgment will help to conserve the
  financial strength and power and manhood of this province for the
  great struggle in which we are engaged, I would be a traitor to my
  country, a traitor to my own conscience, and unworthy of the brave
  sons of Canada that are fighting, bleeding and dying for freedom and
  for us.

  _A letter from one of the most eminent public men in Canada_:

  “British Canada is intensely loyal to the Empire and the Allied
  Cause, but at present recruiting is almost at an end. Why? Partly
  because of considerable dissatisfaction with many of the conditions
  which prevail. Suffering, wounds, death, are expected as inevitable
  in war, but the evil influences, the lavish temptations of liquor
  and bad women which sweep down upon our boys in England, are not
  felt to be necessary, and the hearts of multitudes of Canadian
  parents are hot with indignation at the apparent indifference of the
  authorities to the moral welfare of our troops.”

  _Captain John MacNeill, with the Canadian troops in France_:

  “I say to you solemnly, if England should lose this war because of
  drink, or if England should unnecessarily prolong the war with great
  sacrifice of life in her effort to protect drink, or even if England
  should win the war in spite of drink, you will have put upon the
  bonds of Empire such a strain as they have never known before, and
  such a strain as we cannot promise they will be able to survive.”

  _From the petition presented to the Prime Minister of Canada, signed
  by 64,000 mothers and wives in Toronto_:

  1. That Mothers and Wives of Canada in giving their sons and
  husbands for King and Empire, asked and received from your Minister
  of Militia this only assurance that, in sending them into the ranks,
  we were not hereby irrevocably thrusting them into the temptation of
  Strong Drink.

  2. We appreciated from the depths of our hearts, your action in
  abolishing the Wet Canteen from the Canadian Militia. We believe the
  Wet Canteen established in the ranks of the front to be a double
  danger, robbing our King of the success in arms which in these days
  comes only to the brave heart that is controlled by a clear head,
  and robbing us and our Canada of the Manhood which we gave into our
  Empire’s keeping.

  3. We do not believe that the King will refuse the aid of Canada’s
  sons; nor that he will appreciate your patriotic efforts the less,
  if you keep faith with us and make known to His Majesty, his
  Ministers and Commanders, that our boys are sent forth on the one
  condition that the dispensing of intoxicating liquors shall be
  prohibited in the ranks.

  _From a Sermon preached in Ontario, February 25, 1917_:

  “Thank God, if any of our Canadian soldiers return to us with the
  drink habit formed and raging, we can welcome them to a land nearly
  purged of the liquor traffic, where they may have a chance to
  recover their manhood.”

  _Letter on the effects of Prohibition, from a business man in
  Ontario, published in the “Spectator:”_

  “Men I have known for years to be regular promenading tanks have
  given it up, and are starting a decent life again. The Police Court
  is empty. England should try it. It would be, after the first heavy
  initial loss, the best thing that ever struck the nation. I cursed
  these temperance guys as hard as any, but all the same it cannot
  blind you from the truth.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                     Your Share in the Food Crisis


         The Food and Money Wasted on Drink in Our Great Towns

           ESTIMATED FROM AUGUST 1914 TO APRIL 1917 INCLUSIVE
                       by GEORGE B. WILSON, B.A.,
                  Compiler of the National Drink Bill

   ───────────────────────┬─────────────┬─────────────┬──────────────
                          │ Drink Bill  │ Grain Lost  │Sugar in Beer
   ───────────────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼──────────────
                          │             │    Tons     │     lb.
   United Kingdom         │ £510,000,000│    4,400,000│   762,000,000
   London                 │  £83,000,000│      693,000│   120,000,000
   Edinburgh              │   £3,200,000│       31,000│     5,300,000
   Dublin                 │   £2,600,000│       29,000│     5,000,000
   Glasgow                │  £10,500,000│      101,000│    17,400,000
   Manchester and Salford │  £11,000,000│       92,000│    15,900,000
   Birmingham             │   £9,900,000│       82,000│    14,200,000
   Liverpool              │   £8,800,000│       73,000│    12,600,000
   Sheffield              │   £5,400,000│       45,000│     7,800,000
   Leeds                  │   £5,300,000│       44,000│     7,600,000
   Bristol                │   £4,200,000│       35,000│     6,000,000
   West Ham               │   £3,400,000│       28,000│     4,900,000
   Bradford               │   £3,300,000│       28,000│     4,800,000
   Hull                   │   £3,300,000│       27,000│     4,700,000
   Newcastle              │   £3,100,000│       26,000│     4,500,000
   Nottingham             │   £3,100,000│       26,000│     4,500,000
   Portsmouth             │   £2,800,000│       23,000│     4,400,000
   Stoke                  │   £2,800,000│       23,000│     4,000,000
   Leicester              │   £2,700,000│       22,000│     3,800,000
   Cardiff                │   £2,100,000│       18,000│     3,100,000
   Bolton                 │   £2,100,000│       18,000│     3,000,000
   Croydon                │   £2,100,000│       17,000│     3,000,000
   Sunderland             │   £1,700,000│       14,000│     2,500,000
   Oldham                 │   £1,700,000│       14,000│     2,500,000
   Birkenhead             │   £1,600,000│       13,000│     2,200,000
   Blackburn              │   £1,500,000│       13,000│     2,200,000
   Brighton               │   £1,500,000│       13,000│     2,200,000
   Plymouth               │   £1,500,000│       12,000│     2,100,000
   Derby                  │   £1,400,000│       12,000│     2,100,000
   Middlesbrough          │   £1,400,000│       12,000│     2,100,000
   Stockport              │   £1,400,000│       12,000│     2,100,000
   Norwich                │   £1,400,000│       12,000│     2,100,000
   Southampton            │   £1,400,000│       12,000│     2,000,000
   Swansea                │   £1,400,000│       12,000│     2,000,000
   Gateshead              │   £1,400,000│       11,000│     2,000,000
   Preston                │   £1,400,000│       11,000│     1,900,000
   Coventry               │   £1,300,000│       11,000│     1,900,000
   Huddersfield           │   £1,300,000│       10,000│     1,800,000
   Halifax                │   £1,200,000│       10,000│     1,700,000
   ───────────────────────┴─────────────┴─────────────┴──────────────


                             PLAY THE GAME

           There is one week’s bread in      18 pints of beer
           There is one week’s sugar in      16 pints of beer

  The man who drinks 3 pints a day drinks another man’s rations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                 THE FOOD PYRAMIDS DESTROYED FOR DRINK


[Illustration:

  The Great Pyramid of Egypt, the biggest construction in stone ever
    made by the hands of man—80,000,000 cubic feet of masonry]

[Illustration:

  The Great Pyramids of Food, the biggest wilful destruction of food
    ever known—180,000,000 cubic feet of food destroyed for the Drink
    Trade during the war]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                      How the Brewer Gets Our Food


THE MEN WHO BRING IT

It is easy to talk of a mine-sweeper. I wish the whole nation could
understand what these men are doing. They are feeding the whole
population, battling with the elements as well as with the enemy,
battling with dangers overhead and dangers under the sea. The
mine-sweeper is like the soldier daily over the parapet—he carries his
life in his hand.

                                          _First Lord of the Admiralty._


THE PEOPLE WHO WAIT FOR IT

A London caterer ordered a quantity of sugar from the Philippines. The
mine-sweepers cleared the way for it and it reached the docks. The
caterer sent for it, and was informed that it could only be delivered if
it was for a brewer.

A provincial caterer ordered sugar _and paid for it_, but was told by
the Food Controller that it could only be released if _it was sold to a
brewer_.

A working man was discussing rations with his minister in the street.
“It is very hard,” he said, “to keep to your rations when you have five
strapping lads, but we are going to try it.” Then a drunken man lurched
past. The workman pulled himself together, and said, in great passion:
“I tell you what it is, sir, I am not going to let my boys starve as
long as there is food to make beer for men like that.”


THE PRICE WE PAY FOR IT

Immense quantities of food are used for beer and spirits. All this grain
is lost for food purposes. _If this grain were available for food, the
prices of bread and meat would be lowered._

                                                _War Savings Committee._


THE POOR WHO SUFFER FOR IT

“Rationing bread could not be undertaken without grave risk to the
health of the poor.”

                                                 _Capt. Bathurst, M. P._

                   By what right does the Government

use our mine-sweepers to bring in food for brewers to destroy? allow
brewers to increase the cost of living for every household? and allow
the willful destruction of food supplies to imperil the health of the
poor?

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                       The Way for the Government


We do not want to be amused by fiddlers while our heroes fight and die.

What are the things we see? We see the Government silent in the presence
of what the greatest paper in our greatest overseas Dominion calls “the
blackest tragedy of the war.” We see a trade which the King declared to
be prolonging the war in the crisis of 1915, prolonging it still in the
crisis of 1917. We see our Prime Minister, who has declared this trade
to be worse than Germany, allowing it to have its way. We see our Prime
Minister, who has said we cannot settle with Germany until we have
settled with drink, fearing to settle with drink. Then are we not to
settle with Germany, and are we to surrender to the greatest enemy of
the three?

There is one clear way before the Government; it is the only way of
straightness and patriotism and honour. It is to wind up this enemy
trade and move from our path the greatest hindrance to the winning of
the war. It is to take our side honourably with our great Allies, to
bring to an end the shameful isolation of Great Britain in the drink map
of the great free countries that appears on the back of this book.

It is the sign of weakness everywhere that it seeks a scapegoat for its
sins, and we hear the everlasting talk of Labour. But it will not do. It
is time these slanders on our workmen ceased.

If the Government is afraid of the working man, let it say so, or let it
try him. If it is afraid of temperance people, let it rally them to its
side as one man on the platform where they meet. If it is afraid of the
Drink Trade, then the time has come to say so, for we who send out our
millions to fight a foreign foe are not going to starve for bread
through fear of enemies within our gate. The Prime Minister gave the
Army its munitions; the Army will use them in vain unless the munitions
of life come into our homes.

Working men are tired of men who fool with food and liberty. They do not
object to any equal sacrifice: they believe in the democratic policy of
the King, who based Prohibition, not on class distinction as the
Government did by closing tap-rooms 15 hours a day and leaving cellars
and Parliamentary bars open always, but on the principle of the King’s
own words that “no difference shall be made, so far as his Majesty is
concerned, between the treatment of the rich and poor in this respect.”
Let the Government follow the King, and the people will follow the
Government.

In the highest interests of the nation and the war let this be said as
plain as words can make it—_that there is no body of temperance opinion
anywhere standing in the way of Prohibition_, but that the united moral
forces of the nation would rally to the Government instantly on an act
of a few words such as this:

=That the manufacture and sale of alcoholic beverages be totally
prohibited in the United Kingdom for the period of the war and
demobilization, and that a committee be appointed to deal with all the
private and public interests concerned; and that it be resolved upon,
here and now, that reconstruction be accompanied by universal local
option.=

There would be no opposition the Government need count to a proposal
like that.

[Illustration: TYPOGRAPHICAL UNION LABEL WESTERVILLE O.]




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber’s note:

Obvious typographical and punctuation errors were corrected.

Inconsistencies in hyphenation were retained.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FIDDLERS***


******* This file should be named 53733-0.txt or 53733-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/3/7/3/53733


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

